                                               MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)                              Preprint 28 April 2021             Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0




                                               Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy:
                                               Evidence for Causal Horizons from CMB data
                                                   Pablo Fosalba1,2? and Enrique Gaztañaga,1,2
                                               1 Institute of Space Sciences (ICE, CSIC), Campus UAB, Carrer de Can Magrans, s/n, 08193 Barcelona, Spain
                                               2 Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC), Carrer Gran Capità 2-4, 08193 Barcelona, Spain




arXiv:2011.00910v4 [astro-ph.CO] 27 Apr 2021
                                               Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ



                                               ABSTRACT
                                               The origin of power asymmetry and other measures of statistical anisotropy on the largest scales of the universe, as
                                               manifested in Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) and large-scale structure data, is a long-standing open question
                                               in cosmology. In this paper we analyze the Planck Legacy temperature anisotropy data and find strong evidence
                                               for a violation of the Cosmological principle of isotropy, with a probability of being a statistical fluctuation of order
                                               ∼ 10−9 . The detected anisotropy is related to large-scale directional ΛCDM cosmological parameter variations across
                                               the CMB sky, that are sourced by three distinct patches in the maps with circularly-averaged sizes between 40 to 70
                                               degrees in radius. We discuss the robustness of our findings to different foreground separation methods and analysis
                                               choices, and find consistent results from WMAP data when limiting the analysis to the same scales. We argue that
                                               these well-defined regions within the cosmological parameter maps may reflect finite and casually disjoint horizons
                                               across the observable universe. In particular we show that the observed relation between horizon size and mean dark
                                               energy density within a given horizon is in good agreement with expectations from a recently proposed model of the
                                               universe that explains cosmic acceleration and cosmological parameter tensions between the high and low redshift
                                               universe from the existence of casual horizons within our universe.
                                               Key words: cosmic background radiation – dark energy – large-scale structure of Universe



                                               1 INTRODUCTION                                                      and references therein), and evidence has been reported that
                                                                                                                   this could source deviations from isotropy on cosmological
                                               The standard cosmological model stands on the shoulders of
                                                                                                                   scales (Hansen et al. 2009). However, a more recent analy-
                                               a fundamental assumption: that the universe is statistically
                                                                                                                   sis based on Planck data finds no evidence for such power
                                               homogeneous and isotropic on the largest scales. This as-
                                                                                                                   asymmetry when all scales are taken into account (Quartin
                                               sumption has been thoroughly tested over the last years both
                                                                                                                   & Notari 2015). This is in qualitative agreement with the
                                               with Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) and Large-scale
                                                                                                                   latest results from the Planck Collaboration analysis (Planck
                                               structure data. In particular, the analysis of CMB data, most
                                                                                                                   Collaboration et al. 2020d) where they conclude that the ob-
                                               notably from the WMAP (Bennett et al. 2013) and Planck
                                                                                                                   served power asymmetry is not robust to foreground con-
                                               (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020a) experiments, has not yet
                                                                                                                   tamination or systematic residuals. It is important to note
                                               provided conclusive evidence for the hypothesis of Cosmolog-
                                                                                                                   that previous analysis have concentrated on quantifying po-
                                               ical Isotropy (Eriksen et al. 2004; Hajian et al. 2005; Eriksen
                                                                                                                   tential deviations from statistical isotropy using a statisti-
                                               et al. 2007; Land & Magueijo 2007; Hansen et al. 2009; Samal
                                                                                                                   cal prior. First analyses using WMAP data looked for the
                                               et al. 2009; see also Planck Collaboration et al. 2020d and
                                                                                                                   direction of maximal asymmetry in the sky, thus quantify-
                                               references therein). Moreover, Galactic foreground contami-
                                                                                                                   ing anisotropy for a given preferred direction (Hansen et al.
                                               nation or known systematic effects in the data alone can not
                                                                                                                   2009). In turn this led to proposing a particular angular dis-
                                               explain the observed CMB ”anomalies”, i.e, large-scale devi-
                                                                                                                   tribution of power in the sky to simply capture the observed
                                               ations from the concordance ΛCDM model (see e.g, Rassat
                                                                                                                   anisotropy, such as the so-called ”dipole anisotropy” modu-
                                               et al. 2014; see Planck Collaboration et al. 2020d for a re-
                                                                                                                   lation (Prunet et al. 2005; Gordon 2007). This same model
                                               cent overview). Power asymmetry from CMB data has also
                                                                                                                   has been further constrained with Planck data (Planck Col-
                                               been a matter of intense debate and scrutiny (Gaztañaga
                                                                                                                   laboration et al. 2014, 2016b; Aiola et al. 2015; Mukherjee
                                               et al. 1998; Eriksen et al. 2007; Lew 2008; Hoftuft et al.
                                                                                                                   et al. 2016; Planck Collaboration et al. 2020d). Alternatively,
                                               2009; Paci et al. 2010; Axelsson et al. 2013; Shaikh et al.
                                                                                                                   a recent analysis (Ho & Chiang 2018) focuses on quantify-
                                               2019, see also Dai et al. 2013 for a comprehensive discussion
                                                                                                                   ing possible CMB peak shifts across the sky, finding signifi-
                                                                                                                   cant variations, but they attribute this behaviour to possible
                                                                                                                   systematic effects or the solar dipole. Complementary evi-
                                               ?   e-mail:fosalba@ice.csic.es

                                               © 2020 The Authors
2     Fosalba & Gaztañaga
dence for cosmological anisotropy has been investigated us-         rameters as a function of position in the sky, we proceed as
ing probes of the low redshift universe (see Colin et al. 2011;     follows:
Secrest et al. 2020 and references therein).
                                                                       • Step 1: Data. For our main analysis, we make use of
   In this paper we re-assess Cosmological Isotropy using the
                                                                    the Planck 2018 ”Odd-Even” ring half-mission temperature
latest Planck and WMAP datasets from a different angle, as
                                                                    anisotropy maps (OE maps) obtained with the SMICA fore-
we do not use any prior in our approach. In particular, we
                                                                    ground separation method, along with the Galactic mask
focus on looking at possible variations of the best-fit cos-
                                                                    given by the so-called ”common mask” in combination with
mological parameters across the sky, and test the robust-
                                                                    the half-mission Odd-Even missing pixels (i.e, missing rings
ness of our findings to our analysis choices, data-cuts and
                                                                    of data), which leaves about 76% of the sky available for
foreground contamination. As we shall discuss below, our
                                                                    the cosmological analysis. All the data used in the analysis
analysis shows compelling statistical evidence for large-scale
                                                                    has been downloaded from the Planck Legacy Archive1 . Fig.1
anisotropies (Gaussian isotropic hypothesis has a probability
                                                                    shows one of the two half-mission Odd-Even (OE) tempera-
of ∼ 10−9 ), sourced by large-scale directional variations in all
                                                                    ture anisotropy maps used in our main analysis, smoothed
the basic ΛCDM parameters. We argue that a possible source
                                                                    with a 1 deg. FWHM Gaussian beam for better visualiza-
for such anisotropies is the existence of primordial causal hori-
                                                                    tion, with the Galactic mask overlaid
zons within our observable universe. Such horizons can result
                                                                       • Step 2: Survey sub-samples. We set the size of the disc
from inflation and explain the observed late time cosmic ac-
                                                                    where we perform the cosmological analysis. We choose to use
celeration (Gaztañaga 2020, 2021b). As discussed below, the
                                                                    a circular shape as it is a simple symmetric mask which also
measured correlation between horizon size and mean dark-
                                                                    minimizes mask de-convolution effects on the resulting map
energy density within the detected horizons turns out to be
                                                                    angular power spectrum. For convenience, the location of the
in good agreement with expectations from this model.
                                                                    disc centers are chosen as the coordinates of the pixel cen-
   Previous analyses looking for directional dependence of the
                                                                    ters in a (low-resolution) HEALPixix map. We then project
cosmological parameters involved WMAP (Axelsson et al.
                                                                    a given disc onto the Planck footprint, defining the survey
2013) and, more recently, Planck data (Mukherjee & Wandelt
                                                                    patch as those pixels of the disc which do not overlap with
2018). Axelsson et al. (2013) focused on the power asymme-
                                                                    the Planck galactic foreground emission and resolved point
try and thus, their approach is different with respect to ours
                                                                    source mask
(i.e, theirs is prior dependent). They did find a 3.4σ evidence
                                                                       • Step 3: Power spectrum estimation. We measure the an-
of power asymmetry but only a hint of directional parameter
                                                                    gular power spectrum C` ’s of the Planck temperature map in
dependence in some of the basic ΛCDM parameters, although
                                                                    the survey patch (i.e disc). We use the multipole range from
this non-detection could be due to the lower signal to noise
                                                                    `min = 32 to `max = 2000, to minimize foreground residuals
of the WMAP data with respect to Planck and, in particular,
                                                                    present in Planck data at low and high multipoles, and make
the limited range of scales used, ` < 600. On the other hand,
                                                                    the Gaussian assumption an accurate approximation to the
Mukherjee & Wandelt (2018) follow a closer methodology to
                                                                    true likelihood (for ` > `min ). Following the official Planck
ours, but they use an approximation (first order Taylor ex-
                                                                    analysis papers, we compute C` ’s band-powers with ∆` = 30,
pansion) to relate power spectra to the underlying cosmolog-
                                                                    so that off-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix are kept
ical parameters. Besides, they divide the footprint in a very
                                                                    at the ∼ 10% level for the full Planck footprint (and some-
limited number of patches to sample the sky and do not in-
                                                                    what larger for smaller patches), but ignoring them do not
clude any residual foreground parameter that affect the high
                                                                    bias cosmological parameters within 1-σ statistical errorbars
multipoles (` > 900) of the power spectra, as we do, what
                                                                    (see e.g, Table 1)
can explain that they do not find conclusive evidence for a
                                                                       • Step 4: Error estimation. Diagonal C` ’s errors are es-
directional parameter dependence from their analysis. In fact,
                                                                    timated by re-scaling those from the official Planck power
they only detect some significant anisotropic signal for those
                                                                    spectrum by the effective        area of the patch used, i.e,
patches of the sky that have very small area after removing                                 q
the overlap with the Galactic mask, which is at variance with       ∆C`D /∆C P lanck =         P lanck
                                                                                              fsky       D
                                                                                                       /fsky         P lanck
                                                                                                             , with fsky     = 0.57
what we find, as we shall discuss in detail below.                  which is a good estimate of the ”mean” effective area from the
   The paper is organized as follows: Section §2 describes our      masks of the HFI frequency channels (100,143 and 217 GHz)
data analysis pipeline, its validation and the analysis choices     included in the Planck likelihood. In our fiducial analysis case
taken. In Section §3 we present our main results, including         (sub-areas of 60 degrees in diameter), this corresponds to a
the evidence for spatially coherent cosmological parameter          mean fraction of the sky available for the cosmological analy-
                                                                                                                           D
variations across the sky, and the associated evidence for what     sis (i.e, not overlapping with the Galactic mask), fsky  ≃ 0.05,
we dub as ”horizons” (see text for details) and analyze its         although there are variations from disc to disc across the sky,
robustness against foreground contamination. We conclude in         which we take into account
Section §4 with a summary of our main results, a discussion            • Step 5: Cosmological parameter estimation. Finally, we
of their implications and point out possible future directions.     find the best-fit base ΛCDM cosmological parameters (plus
                                                                    one nuisance foreground residual parameter, see below for
                                                                    details) to the measured C` ’s and errors for each disc. We
                                                                    repeat this operation for all discs that sample the full Planck
2 METHODOLOGY AND DATA ANALYSIS PIPELINE                            footprint

2.1 Analysis Pipeline                                                   In Section §2.2 below, we describe in detail the particular

In order to analyze the Planck temperature maps and in-
vestigate possible variations of the best-fit cosmological pa-      1   https://pla.esac.esa.int/

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                 Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                         3
                                                                       sis (see e.g, Fosalba & Szapudi 2004; Huang et al. 2018).
                                                                       PolSpice is a an approximate pseudo-Cl method that is un-
                                                                       biased, and allows for the fast and accurate estimation of the
                                                                       2-point correlation functions of pixelated maps, correcting for
                                                                       complicated angular masks of finite sky experiments.
                                                                          Finally, best-fit cosmological parameters are inferred from
                                                                       the measured C` ’s in each disc with iMinuit 2 , a code for
                                                                       maximum-likelihood fits of statistical models to data that
                                                                       also provides model parameter errors from likelihood profile
                                                                       estimation. iMinuit assumes a Gaussian distribution of the
                                                                       model parameters, which is a very good approximation in
                                                                       our case, given the analysis choices we make (we use a suffi-
                                                                       ciently large low multipole cut in the analysis, `min = 32, see
                                                                       §2). iMinuit has been widely used for CMB in general and
                                                                       for Planck data analysis in particular in recent years (Henrot-
                                                                       Versillé et al. 2016; Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a), where
Figure 1. Planck 2018 half-mission Odd-Even (OE) SMICA temper-
                                                                       its validation with respect to traditional MCMC methods has
ature anisotropy map, smoothed with 1 degree FWHM Gaussian
                                                                       been thoroughly discussed 3 . The advantage of iMinuit over
beam, shown in orthographic projection. In this projection, the left
hemisphere is centered at the Galactic center, whereras the right      MCMC methods lies in its speed, typically orders of magni-
hemisphere is around the anti-Galactic center. The Galactic mask       tude faster than traditional Bayesian methods but with com-
used is overlaid (in grey color).                                      parable accuracy, provided the parameters are Gaussian dis-
                                                                       tributed. The gain in speed is key in our analysis since a full
                                                                       MCMC approach would be prohibitive given the large num-
choices we make for the main analysis as well as the codes             ber of pixels for which we have to get cosmological parameter
used for the power spectrum and likelihood estimation.                 fits.
                                                                          As a proof of method, in this paper we concentrate
                                                                       on the basic flat-space ΛCDM cosmological parameters
2.2 Analysis Choices                                                   (Ωc h2 , Ωb h2 , H0 , ns , As ), and setting the optical depth to
In what follows we shall use the SMICA CMB map, as it is               reionization, τ , fixed. We note that this choice does not limit
the foreground cleaning method of choice (ie, reference CMB            the generality of our results in practice, since when analyzing
map) in the Planck cosmology papers (Planck Collaboration              the temperature data alone, the optical depth is tightly corre-
et al. 2020c,a). However, we shall show below that our results         lated to the primordial amplitude parameter, AS , which we do
are robust to the choice of foreground separation algorithm            leave free in our analysis. We fix all parametersP that are not
used. As for the data cuts, we choose to use the ”odd-even”            sampled to the following values: τ = 0.0522,        mν = 0.06 eV,
ring half mission maps (OE maps), where frequency maps are             Neff = 3.04 and r = 0 (i.e, no tensors). Additionally, we in-
built using every other pointing period or ring, restricting to        clude an ”effective foreground residual” parameter (APS  eff ), that
either the odd- or the even-numbered rings. The OE maps                accounts for the combined contamination from the Cosmic In-
thus have noise which is largely uncorrelated and free of the          frared Background (CIB) and un-resolved extragalactic point
scanning-dependent systematics. This is important to avoid             sources (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020b), the two main
possible biases in the inferred cosmological parameters from           sources of contamination in Planck HFI data at large multi-
the small scales in the maps, ie. high multipoles in the C`            poles (ie., small angular scales) 4 . These combined residual
(Karim Benabed, private communication; see also Figure A2              foregrounds effectively behave as a single ”shot-noise” con-
in appendix of Planck Collaboration et al. 2020b).                     tribution, APS eff at the power spectrum level if one limits the
   The fiducial analysis value of the disc size is set to 60 de-       analysis to ` < 2000 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a). In
grees in diameter, which yields on average ∼ 2100 sq.deg. of           what follows, we shall denote this nuisance parameter simply
CMB sky outside the galactic and point-source mask. This               as APS for the ease of notation.
mask size turns out to be optimal in terms of signal-to-noise,            As for the multipole range used, we do not consider the
as we will argue below, but we have checked that our main              lowest multipoles and set `min = 32. This makes our analy-
results are robust to changes in disc area by a factor of 5            sis closest to the so-called Planck high-` likelihood (Planck
(ie. disc sizes from 40 to 90 degrees in diameter). As for the         Collaboration et al. 2020b), and it has a two-fold advantage:
resolution of the map pixels used as centers of the set of disc-
masks, in our main analysis we choose to work at HEALPixix
                                                                       2
resolution Nside = 4 (i.e, 192 pixels across the sky) since this         https://iminuit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
                                                                       3 see      the    CAMEL         project    wiki  page    for   details:
already captures all the significant variations of cosmological
parameters across the sky (ie. ` < 12), as it will be shown.           http://camel.in2p3.fr/wiki/pmwiki.php
                                                                       4 We note the ”abuse” of language in our notation as our nui-
However, when estimating the size of such ”horizons” in the
                                                                       sance parameter, APS   eff , effectively combines, in the Planck data
parameter maps we shall use finer resolutions (Nside = 16
                                                                       release papers notation, the following set of nuisance parame-
and 32, what results in 3072 and 12888 discs across the sky,           ters: the extragalactic Poisson point source contribution from
respectively), to have better statistics (see §3.2).                   the different HFI frequency channel pairs 100, 143, 217 GHz
   The angular power spectrum in each disc is computed us-             (APS       PS    PS          PS
                                                                          100 , A143 , A143x217 , A217 ), and the CIB amplitude at 217 GHz
ing the PolSpice code (Szapudi et al. 2001; Chon et al. 2004)          (ACIB
                                                                          217  ), as described   in Planck Collaboration et al. 2020b, Table
which has been extensively used in previous CMB analy-                 16

                                                                                                                  MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
4     Fosalba & Gaztañaga
first it removes scales which are in principle more sensitive to   Table 1. Best-fit cosmological parameters: comparison between the
residual foreground contamination from an imperfect mod-           official Planck results for TT+LowE (Planck Collaboration et al.
eling of diffuse galactic emission (e.g, dust) and secondly, it    2020c, see first column of Table 2), results from our pipeline using
makes the assumed Gaussian likelihood of the power spec-           the full Planck footprint and our analysis choices (see text for
trum a good approximation. At the high multipole end, we           details), and same as the latter but for the average over circular
cut at `max = 2000, since this makes the treatment of fore-        sub-areas of 60 degrees in diameter.
ground residuals simpler in terms of effectively one single         Parameter      Planck2018 Results      Full footprint    Discs
parameter, as mentioned above, without losing any signifi-          Ωc h2             0.121 ± 0.002            0.119         0.119
cant cosmological constraining power with respect to the full       Ωb h2           0.0221 ± 0.0002            0.022         0.022
Planck data resolution, ie. `max = 2500. We note that in cut-       H0                  66.9 ± 0.9              67.5          67.3
ting at `max = 2000 we can also safely neglect the clustered        ns                0.963 ± 0.006            0.960         0.958
CIB component which deviates from the purely shot-noise             As · 109           2.09 ± 0.03              2.07         2.07
behaviour (it scales as a power law) assumed in our analysis        APS                      -                  69.7         69.7
(see Section §3.3.1 in Planck Collaboration et al. 2020b, see
also Figure 15 below).


2.3 Pipeline Validation
We next validate our pipeline by comparing results using
our power spectrum (with PolSpice) and likelihood estima-
tion (iMinuit) agree with the official results published by
the Planck collaboration for the fiducial ΛCDM parameters,
when restricted to temperature data (and low-multipole po-
larization, ie., TT+LowE in the notation used in the Planck
data release). In addition we provide an estimate of the cor-
responding high-multipole residual foreground contamination
amplitude, APS , which depends on the particular `max = 2000
choice we use, and therefore not directly comparable to the
Planck official results.
   Figure 2 shows the angular power spectrum for the Planck
SMICA temperature map as measured with our pipeline (red
symbols), compared to the published results by the Planck          Figure 2. Upper panel: angular power spectrum of the Planck
Collaboration (green symbols). Errorbars for both cases are        SMICA CMB temperature map (red symbols with errors), and
                                                                   its corresponding best-fit to a ΛCDM cosmology (blue solid line).
the ones provided by the Planck Collaboration. The very
                                                                   Published results from the Planck collaboration are also shown
good agreement between our C` ’s and the official Planck re-       (green symbols, slightly shifted to the right for clarity). For refer-
sults validates our pipeline. Moreover the slight discrepancy      ence, we also show the input (solid magenta) and the correspond-
at very high multipoles (` > 1500) does not impact our re-         ing best-fit to the FFP10 simulations (dashed magenta; see Section
sults, as we shall discuss in Section §3.3. Figure 3 shows the     §3.7 for details). Lower panel: relative deviations with respect to
corresponding average C` ’s over the disc sub-areas of 60 de-      the best-fit model
gree diameter, < D60 >, used in our main analysis, along
with the best-fit ΛCDM model.
   Table 1 summarizes the best-fit cosmological parameters
for the different estimates of the power spectrum discussed
above. In particular, it shows that our results for the full
Planck footprint (2nd column) agree with the best-fit param-
eters obtained by the Planck collaboration within the 1-σ
errors (first column; see also Table 2 in Planck Collaboration
et al. 2020c). In turn these values are consistent with the fit
obtained from the average power spectra, < D60 >, over the
3072 discs of 60 degree diameter (see 3rd column), with which
we homogeneously sample the sky to assess anisotropies or
angular variations in the cosmological parameter fits. More-
over, the fact that the discs we use for the analysis recover
cosmological parameters consistent with the full footprint in-
dicates that the cosmological information encoded in the sub-
areas is unbiased within the Planck accuracy.


                                                                   Figure 3. Same as Figure 2 for the mean power spectrum over discs
3 RESULTS                                                          of 60 degree diameter across the sky

We apply the methodology described in Section §2 to the
SMICA CMB temperature map, and obtained a set of power

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                5
spectra for the set of circular patches of a given diameter          Table 2. Location of Horizons in Planck Temperature map (in
size, D hereafter, that sample the entire Planck footprint.          Galactic coordinates)
The set of power spectra obtained from the suite of masks
is the input for the cosmological parameter estimation with           Horizon    Longitude (deg)    Latitude (deg)
                                                                      H1               345                15
which we shall assess possible coherent variations of best-fit
                                                                      H2               240                −5
parameters across the sky.
                                                                      H3               150               −40


3.1 Cosmological parameter maps                                        • we vary the horizon scale θ until we find a minimum of
                                                                     the ”peak height variation” estimator:
Figure 4 displays the basic ΛCDM parameter variations
across the sky. For visualization purposes, we use a ”high-          ∆P = {< dP >δθ − < dP >all−sky }/σPδθ ,                    (1)
resolution” sampling of the sphere using discs centered at the       where < dP >δθ is the mean value of the parameter values
12288 pixels of a HEALPix N side = 32 map, for which angu-           within the ring pixels, < dP >alls ky is the corresponding mean
lar power spectra and cosmological parameters are estimated.         over the entire sky, and σPδθ is the rms scatter over the ring
Parameter ranges shown are symmetrized and chosen to be              pixel values.
illustrative of dynamic range and size of what we describe as
”horizons” for the physical implications that we shall describe         We then test the robustness of the horizon size estimates
below. These ”horizons” correspond to coherent patches with          across ΛCDM parameters and disc size D used to build the
distinct parameter values above or below the mean over the           anisotropy maps. In particular, we vary the area of the discs
full sky.                                                            by a factor of 5, from 40 to 90 degree in diameter. Figures
   It is clear from these maps that there are common fea-            5,6 and 7 show the result of using the procedure outlined
tures or angular patterns in them. In particular, all cosmo-         above yields rather consistent results across cosmological pa-
logical parameters exhibit similar variations across the sky,        rameters, and disc sizes. The estimated horizon size varies
although these anisotropic patterns are at least a factor of two     for the three different horizons. We estimate the sizes to be
larger for the acoustic oscillation related parameters (ωc h2 ,      D(H1 ) ≈ 60 ± 20, D(H2 ) ≈ 70 ± 10, and D(H3 ) ≈ 40 ± 10 de-
Ωb h2 ) than those describing the primordial spectrum of fluc-       grees in radius, where the errors depict the variation across
tuations (AS , ns ). On the other hand, a rather different (and      the different ΛCDM parameters (for a given disc size used)
much larger) spatial pattern of fluctuations is observed for the     and scatter across disc sizes (for a given cosmological param-
foreground-residual amplitude, (APS ), which suggests that           eter). In Figures 8 and 9 we show the three horizons found,
the observed ”horizons” in the cosmological parameter maps           estimated according to Eq.(1), overlaid on the H0 and ΩΛ (de-
have a different cause than the corresponding features in the        rived) parameter variation maps, respectively. Similar maps
foreground parameter map.                                            are obtained for other basic ΛCDM parameters.
                                                                        Our analysis shows that the main results of this paper
                                                                     do not depend on the particular choice of the disc D size
3.2 Horizon size estimation                                          used. We have chosen 60 degree diameter disc as the fiducial
                                                                     case. This is a compromise between sample variance (which is
Once we have found evidence for the existence of ”horizons”          larger for smaller discs), and over-smoothing (which is larger
or coherent patches for the parameter fluctuations around            for bigger discs).
the mean across the sky, we shall estimate the size of such
horizons. For this purpose we shall assume that horizon cen-
ters are those pixels in the map which maximize the differ-          3.3 Robustness to scale cuts
ences with respect to the mean, ie., they are well-defined
peaks (global maxima/minima) in the parameter fluctuation            Here we discuss to what extent our results and, in particular,
map. Therefore we start by finding the peaks in the maps             the main features of the cosmological parameters variation
and ranked them according to their height. The largest three         maps, are robust to the choice of scales included in the anal-
peak-heights thus define the center of the corresponding hori-       ysis. Figure 10 shows the case when we leave out the first
zons that we found to be statistically significant. The location     acoustic peak from the analysis, `min = 450. Even though we
of these peaks or center of the horizons are given in Table 2        leave out the highest signal-to-noise contribution to the angu-
5
  .                                                                  lar power spectrum, the same pattern of parameter variations
                                                                     identified in the fiducial case, shown in Figure 4, remain in
    Our method to estimate the size of such horizons is as
                                                                     the maps. This points to the fact that these main features are
follows:
                                                                     contributed by all the multipoles of the power spectrum, and
   • first we draw rings of width δθ defined by the common           thus is not a signal coming from the largest scales alone. In
pixels of two concentric discs of radius θ and θ + δθ respec-        turn, when we cut out signal-dominated scales the rms fluc-
tively, around the horizon locations given in Table 2                tuation of the parameter maps, σ, increases, as the relative
                                                                     contribution of noise is higher, and thus parameter fluctu-
                                                                     ations are artificially boosted for the same dynamic range
5  In order to determine the horizon center or peak locations in
                                                                     (-4 σ, 4 σ) as can be appreciated by comparing the dynamic
the parameter maps we first smooth the maps with a 10◦ FHWM          range of Figure 10 to the fiducal case, Figure 4.
Gaussian beam to remove small-scale noise. This smoothing scale         A similar qualitative behaviour is observed for the case
is chosen as modes with θ < 10 deg do not contribute significantly   when we cut out multipoles beyond `max = 1500 (see Figure
to the parameter map, as we shall show in Section §3.8               11). The slightly larger contribution from noise introduces

                                                                                                           MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
6     Fosalba & Gaztañaga




Figure 4. ΛCDM and residual foreground nuisance parameter (AP S ) variations across the sky (in Galactic coordinates). In each panel the
color-code displays (%) fluctuations with respect to mean over all-sky within the range ±4σ. The same dynamic range is used for all the
parameter maps shown in this paper. This map, which uses 12288 discs across the sky centered at the pixels of a HEALPix Nside = 32
resolution map, is the baseline for the main results of the paper, and it is based on the input SMICA temperature map. Results obtained
using maps from other foreground separation methods are consistent with those from SMICA, as discussed in Section §3.4.


some additional fluctuations in the parameter maps, although          circles in the sky crossing at the ecliptic poles) which, if not
to a level that is significantly smaller than in the case with        taken into account properly, could potentially bias our re-
`min = 450, what does not alter the main parameter vari-              sults. However, the robustness of our parameter maps to this
ation features across the sky. It is interesting to note that         high-` range shows that such inhomogeneities do not con-
the range of scales ` > 1500 in the power spectrum is the             tribute significantly to these maps. On the other hand, the
most sensitive to noise inhomogenities due to the particular          residual foreground parameter, APS , is only contributing to
scanning strategy of the Planck satellite (i.e, sweeping great        the power spectrum at high multipoles (` > 900, see Fig-


MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                              Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                7




Figure 5. Estimated size of the cosmological Horizons for the 5 ΛCDM parameters used, when the input power spectra are computed in
discs of 40 degrees in diameter.




                             Figure 6. Same as Figure 5 but when using discs of 60 degrees in diameter.




                             Figure 7. Same as Figure 5 but when using discs of 90 degrees in dimaeter.




                                                                                                          MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
8     Fosalba & Gaztañaga
                                                                       ciated parameter map shows arbitrary large variations across
                                                                       the sky (see bottom right panel of Figure 12).


                                                                       3.4 Robustness to foregrounds
                                                                       Since horizons happen to be close to the Galactic plane, it
                                                                       is natural to wonder whether these are affected or even pro-
                                                                       duced by residual Galactic contamination. In order to address
                                                                       this question we have applied the same map-making pipeline
                                                                       for the 4 different component separation maps produced by
                                                                       the Planck collaboration (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020a):
                                                                       SMICA, Commander, SEVEM and NILC. These methods
                                                                       cover very efficient and completely independent approaches
                                                                       to foreground subtraction. In Figure 13, we show the the case
                                                                       for the Commander maps, but similar maps are obtained
Figure 8. The three horizons (denoted by H1 , H2 and H3 ) identified   for SEVEM and NILC. In particular, it is clear from this
across the Hubble parameter variation map. The circular bound-         analysis that the cosmological parameter fluctuations across
ary of each horizon is set when the parameter variation vanishes,      the sky are robust to component separation methods as the
i.e, when it is equal to the all-sky mean (in light yellow for the
                                                                       features in those are largely invariant across methods. On
color scale used). Note that the horizons partially overlap between
                                                                       the other hand, the residual foreground component, APS ex-
them. Very similar horizons are obtained for the other ΛCDM pa-
rameters.                                                              hibits large amplitude (ie., dynamic range) and spatial fluc-
                                                                       tuations across methods, suggesting that indeed the only im-
                                                                       pact of foregrounds on our analysis is through the ”effective”
                                                                       residual point-source-like component, APS . This is explicitly
                                                                       shown in Fig.14, where we illustrate, in the top and mid-
                                                                       dle panels, how the CDM density, Ωc h2 and Hubble param-
                                                                       eter, H0 , display the same features in the half-sum maps,
                                                                       (SMICA + SEVEM/2), whereas the half-difference, (SMICA-
                                                                       SEVEM)/2, is consistent with no signal (note the dynamic
                                                                       range of color scale for the latter is half of that used in the
                                                                       half-sum, to emphasize residuals). This is in contrast with
                                                                       the case for the residual foreground parameter, APS , where
                                                                       notable differences are seen from both component separation
                                                                       methods (bottom panel).
                                                                          As a further test, we have investigated whether our assump-
                                                                       tions about the foreground model template may impact our
                                                                       results. In particular, we have extended our single nuisance
                                                                       parameter in our fiducial analysis, APS , that is only important
                                                                       at large multipoles of the CMB temperature power spectrum,
Figure 9. Same as Figure 8 but for the Dark-Energy density pa-         to include an additional component, related to dust, at low
rameter.                                                               multipoles. In order to implement this, we have derived the
                                                                       power spectrum of the ”CMB-subtracted” SMICA foreground
                                                                       component separation map for the 143 GHz channel 6 , since
                                                                       this represents a good balance between the different HFI fre-
ure 15), so the scale cut `max = 1500 strongly affects this
                                                                       quency channels contributing to the CMB maps. Figure 15
parameter map, as shown in the lower right panel of Figure
                                                                       shows the power spectrum measured from the template com-
11.
                                                                       pared to an analytic fit that accurately reproduces the qual-
   Alternatively, as shown in Fig.12, when only the first three
                                                                       itative behavior of the template at low and high multipoles
acoustic peaks are included in the analysis, `max = 900,
                                                                       (Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a)):
the main features of the parameter maps remain largely un-
changed, although we start seeing some differences with re-            C` = ADust (`/`p )αDust + AP S                               (2)
spect to the full analysis (see Fig.4) that includes up to
six peaks for `max = 2000). This is to be expected, as the             where `p = 3000 is a pivot or reference multipole, ADust
signal-to-noise in the angular power spectrum is well spread           and αDust describe the Galactic dust emission amplitude and
throughout the full dynamic range spanning from `min = 32              spectral index, respectively, and the shot-noise-like ampli-
to `max = 2000, and cutting out scales beyond `max = 900               tude APS effectively encodes the CIB and extragalactic point-
leaves only about half of the total signal-to-noise available          source contamination. We note that, in this extended fore-
to the Planck temperature anisotropy maps and, therefore,              ground parametrization, we do not expect APS to have the
its associated constraining power in terms of cosmological
parameters is also reduced by a similar amount (see Planck
Collaboration et al. 2020c). In turn, the residual foregrounds         6 Maps are available at          the   Planck   Legacy   Archive
are not well constrained in this multipole range, so the asso-         http://pla.esac.esa.int

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                    Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                      9




Figure 10. Same as Fig.4, but for the multipole range (`min , `max ) = (450, 2000), instead of the baseline, (`min , `max ) = (32, 2000). Note
also that in these parameter maps, as for all the robustness tests, we use a factor of 4 coarser sampling of the sphere, i.e., 3072 discs
(instead of the 12288 used in the baseline analysis), as this does not change our results.



same value than in the simpler parametrization (ie., when we             parametrization in our CMB map best-fits to see if that
set ADust = 0).                                                          makes any difference in our main results. In particular,
  Using this parametrization we find the following best-fit              we have first performance a likelihood estimation on an 8-
parameters over the full Planck footprint (ie., same mask                dimensional parameter space, including the same 5 ΛCDM
than for the SMICA temperature CMB map), ADust = 26.5,                   parameters, Ωc h2 , Ωb h2 , H0 , ns , As and the 3 nuisance param-
αDust = −2.6 and APS = 430. This is in good agreement                    eters, ADust , αDust , and APS . When fitting this model to the
with the template values found by the Planck collaboration               Planck CMB temperature map over the full footprint, we find
(Planck Collaboration et al. 2016a).                                     a vanishing dust amplitude, ADust = 0, what shows that our
                                                                         single nuisance quantity is enough to capture foreground con-
  We have used this extended nuisance or foreground

                                                                                                                   MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
10     Fosalba & Gaztañaga




                          Figure 11. Same as Fig.4, but for the multipole range (`min , `max ) = (32, 1500).



tamination on the scale of the full footprint. Next we have          mated spatial variations of the nuisance parameter APS . The
performed the same test but over the average power spec-             rather large and very noisy variations observed for the addi-
tra for disc-shaped patches of 60 degrees in diameter, D60 ,         tional foreground-related parameters (ADust and αDust ) sug-
we used to estimate parameter variations across the sky (see         gest these are purely Gaussian sample variance fluctuations
§3), finding again no evidence for dust in the parameter fits        of otherwise vanishing mean quantities over the sky. There-
either. As a final test, we studied whether this parametriza-        fore this analysis suggests that dust emission does not seem
tion changes the evidence for horizons in the parameter vari-        to have any significant effect on the main anisotropies of the
ation maps. Figure 16 shows that the features of the cosmo-          cosmological parameter maps.
logical parameter maps, as well as the corresponding hori-
                                                                       Moreover, we can statistically quantify the possible im-
zon locations and amplitudes are largely unaffected by this
                                                                     pact of foregrounds (mainly dust, CIB, and extragalactic
potential dust component, the only change being the esti-
                                                                     point sources) on the features that we observe in the cos-

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                              Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                   11




                           Figure 12. Same as Fig.4, but for the multipole range (`min , `max ) = (32, 900).



mological parameter maps. For this purpose, we have studied           of the parameter maps, which are encoded in such dipole and
the possible dependence of the C` ’s of the parameter maps            quadrupole moments, are not significantly affected by fore-
on the different available versions of the foreground cleaned         ground emission.
temperature anisotropy maps. Accordingly, we have replaced
the SMICA map with the other component separation maps
provided by the Planck collaboration, ie. the Commander,              3.5 Comparison to WMAP
SEVEM and NILC maps. Figure 17 shows that our results
                                                                      If the ΛCDM best-fit parameter variations across the CMB
are robust to different foreground cleaning methods. In par-
                                                                      sky are truely cosmological in origin, one should we able to
ticular, only few % variations in the dipole and quadrupole
                                                                      detect them using any CMB dataset, provided it has enough
amplitudes are observed, but largely keeping the sum of them
                                                                      signal to noise. In turn this provides an important test for sur-
unchanged. Thus we conclude that the ”horizon”-like features
                                                                      vey specific systematics as a possible source for the detected

                                                                                                               MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
12     Fosalba & Gaztañaga




                 Figure 13. ΛCDM cosmological parameter variations across the Commander CMB temperature map.


anisotropic signal. As a cross-check of our main results, based   the final (9-year) temperature data maps from the LAMBDA
on the Planck temperature data maps, we shall perform an          website7 for the 6 channels within the V and W frequency
equivalent analysis on the WMAP 9-year data (Bennett et al.       bands (V1,V2,W1,W2,W3,W4). We note that we use the
2013), which has a lower angular resolution and higher noise      maps with the asymmetric component of the beam ”decon-
per power spectrum multipole beyond the first acoustic peak       volved”, so as to avoid introducing spurious anisotropic sig-
with respect to Planck. However, we expect to find evidence       nals from CMB maps in our results (see Hanson et al. 2010).
for consistent patterns of angular variations of the best-fit     As for the Galactic mask, we use the ”Extended Temperature
cosmological parameters across the sky for WMAP, although         Analysis Mask” (KQ75y9) that leaves about 69% of the sky
at lower statistical significance.
  Our WMAP data analysis pipeline is described below:
  • Step 1: Data. Following Bennett et al. (2013), we use         7   https://lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                             Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                   13




Figure 14. Half-sum (left) and half-difference (right) maps for parameter variations obtained from the SMICA vs. SEVEM CMB maps.
Top and middle panels show two examples of cosmological parameters, while the bottom panels show the case for the nuisance or residual
foreground parameter.


available for the analysis. Fig.18 shows an example map (W-          sulting C` ’s with the (symmetrized) beam transfer functions
band frequency channel) smoothed with a 1 degree Gaussian            as provided in the LAMBDA website. We then subtract an
beam (for better visualization) along with the mask used             estimate of the frequency-dependent bias due to unresolved
                                                                     radio point sources (see Section §6.2 in Bennett et al. 2013)
  • Step 2: Power spectrum estimation per channel. We com-
                                                                       • Step 3: Final Power Spectrum. The final power spec-
pute angular power spectra for each pair, with an inverse
                                                                     trum is obtained by combining the cross-spectra from the
variance (inhomogeneous) noise weighting given by w =
√                                                                    15 channel
                                                                              q pairs using an inverse noise weighting given by
  Nobs /σ0 , where Nobs is the number of observations per pixel
and σ0 is the noise per observation for a given channel (as          wi,j = 1/ σ0i σ0j , where the indexes i, j run over all the chan-
given in Table 5 of Bennett et al. 2013), and deconvolve the re-     nel pairs and σ0i is the noise per observation for the i channel

                                                                                                            MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
14      Fosalba & Gaztañaga
                                                                        3.6 Horizons as the source of power asymmetry
                                                                        The basic features of acoustic peaks in the CMB power spec-
                                                                        tra can be entirely determined from three fundamental scales
                                                                        or multipoles that depend on the cosmological parameters
                                                                        (Hu et al. 2001): the matter-radiation equality (`EQ ), the
                                                                        acoustic (`A ), and the damping scale (`D ). From the set
                                                                        of 3072 discs of 60 degree in diameter, D60 , we estimate
                                                                        `EQ = 148 ± 7, `A = 304.0 ± 0.6, and `D = 2018 ± 38. Further-
                                                                        more we can thus use the cosmological parameter variation
                                                                        maps measured in section §3.1 to derive the corresponding
                                                                        variations of these scales across the sky. In particular, we
                                                                        use the following expressions for a flat ΛCDM model (see
                                                                        Eqs.(A15)-(A17) in Hu et al. (2001)):
                                                                        ∆`EQ         ∆h        ∆ωb        ∆ωm
                                                                             ≈ −0.48    + 0.07     − 0.15     ,                      (3)
                                                                        `EQ           h         ωb         ωm

Figure 15. SMICA ”CMB-subtracted” foreground template map               ∆`A   ∆h        ∆ωm
power spectrum (red line) compared to an analytic fit (blue line) in-
                                                                            ≈    + 0.59     ,                                        (4)
                                                                         `A    h        ωm
cluding a dominant diffuse dust emission at low multipoles (green)
and an effective point-source component at high multipoles (ma-
                                                                        and,
genta).                                                                 ∆`D        ∆h        ∆ωb        ∆ωm
                                                                            ≈ 0.42    + 0.20     − 0.12     ,                        (5)
                                                                         `D        h          ωb         ωm
                                                                        being ωm = ωc + ωb , with ωc = Ωc h2 , ωb = Ωb h2 , and
                                                                        h = H0 /100.
  • Step 4: Multipole range for likelihood estimation. In order            Figure 21 shows that the relative spatial variations of these
to avoid potential foreground contamination, we set a lower             fundamental scales exhibit the same features observed for the
multipole `min = 32 as we did for Planck, and a maximum                 basic ΛCDM parameter maps, displaying in particular the
multipole `max = 900 to avoid beam suppresion effects and               three coherent ”horizon” shapes described above. This in turn
residual high multipole foregrounds in the analysis. This in            emphasizes the universal nature of the features attributed to
turn means that we only need to fit the 5 Λ CDM cosmo-                  the cosmological horizons.
logical parameters to the final power spectra as the residual              On the other hand, a long-standing and puzzling anomaly
foreground amplitude APS is negligible on these scales (unlike          in CMB analyses is the significant hemispherical power asym-
the reference analysis we presented above for Planck)                   metry first found in WMAP data analyses (Eriksen et al.
                                                                        2004, 2007; Lew 2008; Hansen et al. 2009; Hoftuft et al. 2009;
   As a validation of the above analysis pipeline, Figure 19            Paci et al. 2010; Axelsson et al. 2013; Dai et al. 2013) and
shows the resulting angular power spectrum (and derived                 more recently confirmed using Planck data (Planck Collab-
best-fit ΛCDM parameters), when we use the full available               oration et al. 2014; Akrami et al. 2014; Aiola et al. 2015;
area from the WMAP mask, compared to the WMAP team                      Planck Collaboration et al. 2016b; Mukherjee et al. 2016;
results (Bennett et al. 2013), showing very good agreement,             Planck Collaboration et al. 2020d). In particular, Akrami
given the errors.                                                       et al. (2014) claimed a detection at the 3.3σ level, arguing
   We then repeat this analysis but for each of the 3072 discs          that their measurement is robust to systematic effects and
of 60 degree diameter distributed across the sky. The re-               foregrounds, what points to a (yet unknown) physical origin
sulting best-fit parameters for each disc are shown in the              for the source of this anisotropy.
left panels of Figure 20, whereas the corresponding results                We shall provide below a simple explanation for the ori-
for Planck, using the same scale cuts (i.e, `min = 32 and               gin of this power asymmetry in terms of the cosmological
`max = 900) are displayed in the right panels. Although the             horizons, i.e, physically disconnected regions of our universe.
WMAP signal-to-noise with the used scale cuts is 3 times                In particular, if these horizons do exist, as our analysis sug-
lower than the full Planck analysis (i.e, with `max = 2000) we          gest (see Section §3.8 below for their significance), the fea-
still expect to see some hints of the same anisotropic signals          tures they imprint on the maps of ΛCDM parameters or
across WMAP maps. Remarkably, for the parameters Ωb h2 ,                fundamental scales could be responsible for the observed
H0 and ns , we do observe the same large scale anisotropic              CMB power asymmetry. In previous analyses, Hansen et al.
patterns (i.e, horizons) than in Planck, whereas for Ωc h2 and          (2009) found maximal asymmetry in WMAP data for a ref-
AS , we find some differences, specially in the left hemisphere         erence direction (center of one of the hemispheres) pointing
(i.e, the one around the galactic center). in fact, some dif-           to (l, b) = (226◦ , −17◦ ), which is consistent with more re-
ferences are to be expected since, as we mentioned, WMAP                cent estimates by Akrami et al. (2014), who estimate a pre-
data has larger noise (and lower resolution) than Planck. In            ferred direction towards (l, b) = (212◦ , −13◦ ) using Planck
fact, for WMAP we expect the noise to contribute to a sim-              data. These directions are broadly consistent (within their
ilar (although somewhat lower) level than the signal to the             estimated errors, see Fig.3 in Akrami et al. 2014) with the
parameter maps, what seems to be in agreement with the fact             center of the H2 horizon, located at (l, b) = (240◦ , −5◦ ), (see
that larger parameter variations are observed in the WMAP               Table 2).
maps, as compared to Planck.                                               To illustrate how this particular test of cosmological

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                     15




Figure 16. Parameter variation maps for the extended foreground model. Note that the maps for the ΛCDM parameters do not significantly
change with respect to the single nuisance parameter case used in the fiducial analysis. The mean amplitude of the dust emission foreground
parameters (Adust ) across the sky is consistent with zero, what induces large angular fluctuations of the extended foreground parameters
(see text for details).


anisotropy also seems to originate from the existence of such           ing towards H2 , we find a 15% higher matter density and 5%
horizons, in Figure 22 we show the (3D) distribution of val-            lower expansion rate, that is correlated with a 2% smaller
ues for the matter density Ωm and Hubble parameter H0 as a              spectral index, as compared to the values found in the oppo-
function of the spectral index ns in discs distributed across the       site (O2 ) hemisphere. Similar albeit somewhat smaller param-
sky. In particular, non-negligible shifts in estimated best-fit         eter differences are found when defining hemispheres point-
parameters are inferred from the hemisphere centered at the             ing to the H1 and H3 horizons. However we must emphasize
H2 horizon with respect to the opposite direction (denoted by           that the cosmological parameter hemispherical asymmetries
O2 in Figure 22). In particular, inside the hemisphere point-


                                                                                                                 MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
16     Fosalba & Gaztañaga




Figure 17. Power spectra of the parameter variation maps: anisotropy features in the map are encoded in lowest multipoles (` < 10).
Colors show different choices for the foreground component separation algorithms used to obtain the CMB temperature map, whereas
the symbols with errorbars display the corresponding measurements from Gaussian isotropic simulations (see section §3.8 for the related
discussion of the significance of the power spectrum monopole and dipole of the parameter maps that use as input the fiducial (SMICA)
foreground cleaned map.




Figure 18. WMAP temperature anisotropy map for the W fre-
quency band, smoothed with 1 degree FWHM Gaussian beam.
                                                                      Figure 19. Estimate of the angular power spectrum of the WMAP
The Galactic mask used is overlaid.
                                                                      temperature map (red symbols), compared to the published results
                                                                      from the WMAP team (green symbols, slightly shifted to the right
                                                                      for clarity). The spectrum for the best-fit parameters is shown by
                                                                      the solid blue line. Lower panel shows residuals of the estimated
                                                                      spectrum with respect to the best-fit.

hinted above are not found to be statistically significant given
the estimated errors (i.e, scatter across discs measurements).

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                           Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                  17




Figure 20. ΛCDM parameter maps for WMAP (left) and Planck (right). Both datasets use the same scale cuts, as detailed in the text.




                                                                                                          MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
18      Fosalba & Gaztañaga




                                                                       Figure 22. Power asymmetry from cosmological horizons: differ-
                                                                       ences in Ωm , H0 and ns for the hemispheres pointing towards the
                                                                       center of the H2 horizon (purple symbol with errors) and its op-
                                                                       posite direction on the sky O2 (green). The mean value across the
                                                                       sky is shown for reference (black dot).




                                                                       Planck Collaboration et al. (2020b)), we need to combine an-
                                                                       gular power spectra from the 100, 143 and 217 GHz frequency
                                                                       channels. This amounts to a total of 900 CMB simulated
                                                                       maps.
Figure 21. Maps of spatial variations of the fundamental scales of        On the other hand, as mentioned above, for each frequency
the CMB power spectrum: top panel shows changes in the equality        channel, we have also used the 300 available realizations of
scale, middle panel shows the corresponding map for the acoustic       the (anisotropic) noise and instrumental effect residual maps.
scale and the bottom panel the damping scale (see text for details).   We select the version corresponding to the ”Odd” and ”Even”
These maps show the same features than in the cosmological pa-         (OE) stable pointing periods to model the corresponding OE
rameter maps (see e.g. Figure 4).
                                                                       data cuts used in our analysis. Again, we need to combine
                                                                       noise maps from the three relevant HFI frequency channels
3.7 Simulations                                                        in order to properly model the Planck likelihood estimation,
                                                                       what amounts to a total of 900 noise realizations (× 2 data
In order to quantify the significance of the measured angular          cuts). Finally we can combine each CMB and noise realization
features in the cosmological parameter maps we have ana-               (for each frequency channel and OE data cut) to produce a
lyzed two sets of simulations. First, we have used a set of            set of ”realistic” simulations of the Planck temperature maps.
300 ”Full Focal Plane” (FFP10) lensed CMB maps8 , which                   In order to validate the CMB plus noise realizations, we
are convolved with the FEBeCoP effective beams. We note                make use of our validated cosmological parameter estimation
that we limit our analysis to 300 CMB realizations per fre-            pipeline described in Section §2.3, involving the computation
quency channel (out of the 1000 available in the Planck                of cross power-spectra C` ’s using the same Galactic mask that
Legacy Archive) so as to match the number of correspond-               is applied to the analysis of the real data (see Section §2) .
ing FFP10 noise realizations available in the Planck Legacy            This involves computing 1500 cross power-spectra involving
Archive. CMB maps are provided for the full-mission only               OE1×OE2 rings maps for the 5 frequency pair combinations
and, in order to follow the Planck likelihood estimation (see          (100 × 100, 100 × 143, 143 × 217, 217 × 143 and 217 × 217 GHz)
                                                                       for each of the 300 realizations per frequency channel.
8 Planck simulations are available from the Planck                        As a first validation, we estimated the cosmological best-fit
Legacy     Archive     webpage,    http://pla.esac.esa.int             parameters from the average of the 300 simulated map power
and they are described in the Planck Legacy Archive                    spectra using the full Planck mask (instead of the set of discs)
wiki,http://wiki.cosmos.esa.int/planck-legacy-                         to see if we recover the input flat-space ΛCDM cosmological
archive/index.php/Simulation_data                                      parameters given in the Planck Legacy Archive Simulations

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                               Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                        19




                                                                       Figure 25. Planck 2018 Odd-Even rings half-mission half-difference
                                                                       (OEHD) SMICA temperature map, smoothed with 10 degree
Figure 23. Mean power spectrum for a set of 300 Planck tem-
                                                                       FWHM Gaussian beam, shown in orthographic projection. This
perature FFP10 CMB+noise realizations compared to its best-
                                                                       map represents an estimate of the anisotropic noise and residual
fit model, i.e, basic ΛCDM cosmology plus an additional nui-
                                                                       systematics from the data.
sance (residual foreground) parameter (see text for details). Lower
panel depicts differences between simulation measurements (sym-
bols with errorbars) and the best-fit model (solid blue line).
                                                                       As shown in the figure, the best-fit cosmology is consistent
                                                                       with a scalar spectral index ns = 1.00 (see dashed line in
                                                                       Figure 2 what is clearly at variance with the claimed input
                                                                       cosmology, with ns = 0.964 , for the FFP10 CMB realiza-
                                                                       tions ( see solid magenta line in Figure 2) according to the
                                                                       Planck Legacy Archive Simulations wiki. We have also veri-
                                                                       fied that using CMB realizations alone (i.e, without adding
                                                                       noise) we consistently recover the same best-fit spectral in-
                                                                       dex. Moreover, the recovered value of ns is more than 6 σ
                                                                       away from the Planck best-fit value (see Figure 2, and Table
                                                                       1), what makes the cosmology simulated rather unrealistic.
                                                                       Therefore it is clear that something is wrong with this set
                                                                       of simulations and we have not been able to clarify exactly
                                                                       what. In view of this, we decided not to use the FFP10 CMB
                                                                       simulations for our analysis, since we could not validate them
                                                                       with the same pipeline we used for the data and with which
                                                                       we could recover the best-fit values obtained by the Planck
                                                                       Collaboration within 1-σ errors (see Table 1).
                                                                          As for the FFP10 anisotropic noise realizations, that incor-
Figure 24. Impact of the anisotropic noise: the mean power spec-       porate the Planck scanning strategy, Figure 24 shows that the
trum for a set of 300 FFP10 noise realizations (blue symbols) com-     amplitude of the noise for the OE data cuts used (which in
pared to the mean Planck temperature power spectrum measure-           turn is in good agreement with a simple noise and residual
ments (green line) and associated errors (thick red line) in discs     systematics estimate from the half-mission half-difference OE
across the sky. Lower panel shows that the average anisotropic
                                                                       maps, specially at thigh multipoles), is negligibly small, of or-
noise amplitude (which is comparable to the simple noise estimate
from the half-mission half difference maps, magenta line) is of or-
                                                                       der 1% at most, compared to the 1-σ errors of the estimated
der 1% of the amplitude of the 1-σ errors in the power spectra         mean power spectrum in the disc-like patches that we use
used to derive the cosmological parameter maps.                        to derive the cosmological parameter maps. In addition, in
                                                                       Figure 25 we show the spatial distribution of the estimated
                                                                       noise from the data (i.e, half-mission half-difference OE maps,
wiki (Ωc h2 = 0.120, Ωb h2 = 0.0222, H0 = 67 Km/s/Mpc,                 smoothed with a 10 degree FWHM Gaussian beam for clar-
ns = 0.964, As · 109 = 2.120)9 .                                       ity), is spatially uncorrelated with the ”horizons” in the cos-
  Figure 23 shows the resulting mean power spectrum esti-              mological parameter maps (see e.g, Figures 8,9). We can thus
mated from the 300 FFP10 CMB plus noise realizations10 .

9 Although we have also fixed the optical depth                        power estimates depicted at multipoles ` = 800, 1190, most visible
                                                  P to reionization,
τ = 0.060, and the sum of the neutrino masses, mν = 0.060 eV,          in the lower panel of Figure 23, reflect the slightly step-like change
to the values given in the Planck wiki, we have checked that setting   in the weights applied when combining the power spectra from
them to the Planck best-fit values (see Table 1) does not change       different frequency pairs, approximately following the scheme used
the outcome of our validation                                          in the Planck likelihood estimation (see Planck Collaboration et al.
10 We note that the small discontinuities or jumps in the band         (2020b))

                                                                                                                 MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
20       Fosalba & Gaztañaga
safely conclude that the anisotropic noise does not have any                                                                                        (6)
impact on our main results.
                                                                             where    C`i  and     C`data with ` = 1, 2 refer to the
   As an alternative, we produced a suite of 300 Gaussian
                                                                             dipole/quadrupole multipoles of the i-th simulation and the
simulations, including the lensed CMB temperature plus a
                                                                             data, respectively, and Cov −1 (`, `0 ) is the inverse of the co-
residual foreground sky, making use of the SYNFAST HEALPix
                                                                             variance matrix for the dipole and quadrupole estimated from
routine with best-fit parameters to Planck temperature and
                                                                             the set of Nsim = 300 simulations.
low multipoles of the polarization data (see Table 2 in Planck
                                                                                Our results are summarized in Figure 26. By definition,
Collaboration et al. 2020c; see also Table 1 above), and added
                                                                             if the data is consistent with a Gaussian realization drawn
one Poisson-like ”residual foreground” amplitude that effec-
                                                                             from this set of simulations, the mean value of this ∆χ2
tively accounts for the combination of CIB and extragalactic
                                                                             distribution is equal to the number of degrees of freedom,
point sources contributions from different frequency chan-
                                                                             i.e, 2 (shown as a vertical line in the figure). However the
nels, as explained above (see Section §2). This input fore-
                                                                             dipole and quadrupole in the data show ∆χ2 distributions
ground amplitude is determined from a joint fit of the basic
                                                                             significantly away from the Gaussian expectations, yielding a
ΛCDM cosmology and this ”effective nuisance” parameter to
                                                                             ∼ 2.5% probability of being consistent with a Gaussian fluc-
the Planck temperature map over the full footprint (i.e, we
                                                                             tuation for Ωc h2 and Ωb h2 , whereas this probability drops to
use the ”common” mask for half-mission maps and the ”miss-
                                                                             0.4% for H0 , 0.06% for ns and 0.0004% for AS . Although the
ing pixel” mask for the ”Odd-Even” data cuts, which leaves
                                                                             quoted significances are derived from the SMICA map, we
about 76 % of the sky unmasked). Using this set-up we es-
                                                                             have checked that these values do not significantly change if
timate an amplitude of APS ≃ 70, from the SMICA version
                                                                             we use a different component separation map. On the other
of the CMB map, as shown in Table 1. To the resulting suite
                                                                             hand, It is interesting to note that a relatively low probability
of simulated maps, we apply the same methodology for the
                                                                             3.5% is also found for the extragalactic residual foreground
power spectra estimation in discs across the sky and corre-
                                                                             parameter, AP S . However the all-sky mean value (and thus its
sponding cosmological best-fit parameter estimation than we
                                                                             angular variations) is not robust to the choice of foreground
did for the data maps, as described in section §2.
                                                                             cleaned map used.
   Figure 17 shows the the power spectra of the parameter
                                                                                We can then estimate a total significance for the cosmolog-
variation maps from the set of discs is largely dominated by
                                                                             ical parameter horizons generalizing Eq.(6) by combining the
the very lowest multipoles (dipole and quadrupole in par-
                                                                             5 cosmological parameter contributions, and including their
ticular) and higher multipoles are quickly suppressed i.e, we
                                                                             covariance,
can use a course sampling of the sky with discs to accurately
estimate the observed variations of the parameter maps. In                             X i
                                                                             ∆χ2T ot =                data
                                                                                           (C`,α − C`,α    ) · Cov −1 (`, `0 , α, β)(C`i0 ,β − C`data
                                                                                                                                                  0 ,β )
practice, we use discs located at the center of the Healpix
                                                                                         α,β
pixels of a map with Nside = 4 (i.e, 192 discs across the
sky) to measure power spectra of the parameter maps up                                                                                              (7)
to `max = 12. In turn this means that we have estimated                                                2       2
                                                                             where {α, β} = {Ωc h , Ωb h , H0 , ns , As }, and we have omit-
a total of 192 discs/realization × 300 realizations = 57, 600                ted the sum over multipoles and simulation index for ease of
6-dimensional (ΛCDM+nuisance) parameter fits. Using this                     notation. The result is shown in Figure 27. Taking the aver-
procedure, we see that the measured amplitudes for the dipole                age over the ∆χ2T ot distribution one thus obtain a value of
and quadrupole in the data are clearly in excess of what is                  60.4 which for the 10 degrees of freedom (5 ΛCDM parame-
found in the Gaussian simulations.                                           ters × 2 multipoles) gives a Gaussian probability of 3 × 10−9 .
                                                                             It is interesting to note that the covariance between parame-
                                                                             ters (for a given multipole) is found to have negligible impact
3.8 Significance of Casual Horizons                                          (within 2 %) on the computation of the significance, what
                                                                             means that the features of one best-fit cosmological parame-
The appearance of horizons in the angular fluctuations across
                                                                             ter map are not statistically correlated with the correspond-
the sky of the cosmological best-fit values seem quite promi-
                                                                             ing features in a another parameter map, what means that
nent and their angular size are robust to the mask area used.
                                                                             the quoted cosmological anisotropy is signficantly contributed
We note however that the amplitude of the parameter vari-
                                                                             by all the sampled ΛCDM parameters11 . On the other hand
ations depends somewhat on the patch size used, as sample
                                                                             neglecting the off-diagonal elements of the full covariance, i.e,
variance modulates them. Ultimately, for the main results of
                                                                             excluding the covariance between multipoles and among pa-
the paper, we have chosen disc size of 60 degree diameter as
                                                                             rameters, changes the probability by an order of magnitude
the fiducial case which is, as noted in Section §3.2, a compro-
                                                                             (drops from 3 × 10−9 to 4 × 10−10 ). This is the main result of
mise between sample variance (larger for smaller discs), and
over-smoothing (larger for bigger discs).
  The significance of the dipole and quadrupole amplitudes                   11  Note that for the covariance estimation we make use of Gaus-
of the data parameter map is assessed by estimating how                      sian isotropic simulations. This makes the amplitude of the power
many Gaussian simulations display an amplitude of these two                  spectrum multipoles of the best-fit cosmological parameter maps
multipoles as large as those measured in the data. In order                  from simulations to be systematically lower than the data, as
to quantify this significance, for each parameter α, we define               shown in Figure 17. However for a given high multipole (` > 32),
a ∆χ2 statistic as follows,                                                  we expect the Gaussian covariance between cosmological parame-
                                                                             ter maps to be a reasonably accurate estimate of the covariance in
          X      Nsim
                  X                                                          the data (see Muir et al. 2018 for the impact of non-Gaussianity,
∆χ2α =                     i
                         (C`,α   data
                               −C`,α  )·Cov −1 (`, `0 )(C`i0 ,α −C`data
                                                                    0 ,α )   as induced by survey artifacts and foregrounds, in the covariance
         `,`0 =1,2 i=1                                                       estimation of CMB ”anomalies” at low multipoles).

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                 Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                      21




Figure 26. Significance of features in data parameter maps: histogram shows the ∆χ2 distribution of the dipole and quadrupole amplitudes
in data vs. Gaussian isotropic simulations. Mean values of the distribution in excess from ∆χ2 = 1 (vertical dashed line) quantify deviations
from Gaussian isotropy (dashed line), with a probability of being a statistical fluctuation as quoted in the panel labels.



                                                                         data vs. lower redshift probes, such as SN Ia (see Planck Col-
                                                                         laboration et al. 2020c; Riess 2019 and references therein).
                                                                         Here we provide an alternative angle to this ”tensions” by an-
                                                                         alyzing the differences one can find already from statistically
                                                                         significant fluctuations across the CMB temperature maps,
                                                                         ie, apparent ”tensions” from measurements of the universe at
                                                                         redshift z ≈ 1100. Because the horizons cover roughly circu-
                                                                         lar patches of ≃ 60 degree radius in the CMB sky, the corre-
                                                                         sponding comoving transverse extent is similar to the comov-
                                                                         ing radial separation between us and the CMB last scattering
                                                                         surface. Thus if we interpret the measured CMB horizons as
                                                                         causally disconnected regions, we should also expect simi-
                                                                         lar variation in cosmological parameters between z = 0 and
                                                                         z ≃ 1100. Figure 4 in Gaztañaga (2021b) shows the observ-
                                                                         able angular size of the horizons as a function of z. At z < 2
Figure 27. Same as Figure 26 but for the total significance for the
                                                                         this angle is larger than 180 degrees (i.e, the largest accessi-
combined ΛCDM parameters. Solid line displays the significance           ble separations in the sky), so we do not expect to observe
from the Planck measurement, whereas the dashed line depicts the         angular variations within the local universe.
reference Gaussian isotropic expectation.                                  Figure 28 shows the correlations among cosmological pa-
                                                                         rameters for discs whose pixel at the center is within one
                                                                         well-defined horizon, ie, H1 , H2 and H3 . The first interesting
this paper, and shows that, for a flat ΛCDM model, there is a            thing to note is that the probability distributions of the pa-
directional dependence of the cosmological parameters across             rameters hardly overlap for the 2 most significant horizons
the sky that is inconsistent with the Cosmological principle             (H1 , H2 ), with differences significantly away given the errors
of isotropy to a very high degree of confidence, i.e, a prob-            (rms scatter across patches overlapping each horizon).
ability of ∼ 10−9 . In turn this anisotropy is related to the
existence of three well-defined coherent regions, dubbed hori-              Even if statistically significant, one may wonder whether
zons, where the CMB temperature data prefer significantly                the horizons we detect are sourced by some unknown sys-
different best-fit values.                                               tematics instead of a true cosmological signal. In Figure 29
                                                                         we display the scatter plots between the χ2 /dof for each disc
                                                                         measurement across the sky against the ΛCDM parameters
                                                                         and the nuisance (residual foreground) parameter, for the
3.9 ”Tensions” between best-fit parameters from different
                                                                         three horizons detected. Scatter plots are colored according
    Horizons
                                                                         to density, so that lighter colors depict higher density of mea-
Recent claims in the literature point to significant tensions in         surements. Two main features arise from these plots. First,
cosmological parameter constraints, the most notable being               the fact that most of the discs exhibit low χ2 /dof values (typ-
the determination of the Hubble parameter from the CMB                   ically ≃ 1). This means that the BAO features (which cap-

                                                                                                                  MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
22      Fosalba & Gaztañaga




Figure 28. 2D parameter correlation plots for measurements within the three horizons identified in the SMICA temperature map, H1 , H2 ,
and H3 (scatter plots with colors), and the mean values over the entire footprint (all-sky). For reference, summary statistics include both
the mean and scatter for the 12288 disc measurements across the sky.


ture most of the information content in the power spectrum              support to the cosmological origin of the observed large-scale
in the multipole range considered, 32 < ` < 2000) are well              parameter anisotropies.
fitted by the same flat-space ΛCDM model that the average
measurements over the full Planck footprint, but with slightly             Therefore, if cosmological parameters show significant vari-
different best-fit values. Secondly, if a non-cosmological sig-         ations between experiments carried out separately over those
nal was driving the observed anisotropies, one would expect             particular horizons, one would expect to find statistical ”ten-
the largest fluctuations in the cosmological parameter maps             sions” in the corresponding best-fit parameters. In fact, as
would be strongly correlated with high χ2 values, which is              pointed out in Section §3.1, parameter differences between
not what we observe. The above two arguments lend further               the two most significant horizons are up to ∼ 30%, e.g, for the
                                                                        Hubble parameter. If these differences are typical of causally

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                                Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                     23




Figure 29. Correlation between the χ2 per degree of freedom with the best-fit ΛCDM and residual foreground parameters within the H1 ,
H2 , and H3 (from top to bottom rows, respectively). Plots are colored according to density, so that lightest colors correspond to the most
highly populated regions in the 2D space (i.e, larger number of disc measurements). The rightmost panels show the distribution of the χ2
values inside a given horizon, whereas the vertical dashed line displays the mean value.


disjoint horizons in the universe, not only at the last scatter-        of being consistent with a Gaussian fluctuation is < 3% for
ing surface, as we find here, but also in the local universe,           each of the cosmological parameters explored (see Figure 26),
it may provide a simple explanation for the observed cosmo-             which is in qualitative agreement with the quoted significance
logical parameter ”tensions” between low and high redshift              from previous analysis on CMB anomalies. Moreover, when
datasets (see e.g, Riess et al. 2019; Wong et al. 2019; Mar-            all parameters are combined, the resulting probability drops
tinelli & Tutusaus 2019; Planck Collaboration et al. 2020c;             to ∼ 10−9 (see Figure 27), which is a very strong evidence
Park & Rozo 2020 and references therein).                               for Cosmological anisotropy on the largest accessible scales.
                                                                           We shall stress that the anisotropy we find is correlated
                                                                        with the dominant dipole-modulation found in other analyses
                                                                        (such as the power asymmetry analyses), but it is uncorre-
4 DISCUSSION                                                            lated (directionally) with the residual Doppler signal present
The so-called ”anomalies” in CMB data have posed a chal-                in the Planck maps. In fact, as shown in Planck Collaboration
lenge to the standard model since the release of WMAP data,             et al. (2016b) (see their Figures 34 & 35), the Doppler resid-
almost two decades ago (Bennett et al. 2003). Although the              ual only affects high multipoles through the so-called ”aber-
significance of such anomalies depends on the estimator and             ration” effect, which points to the direction (l,b) ∼ (260, 40)
specific data set used, some of the statistical tensions with           degrees, clearly away from our three horizon centers. More-
the ΛCDM model have been recently confirmed using the un-               over, as mentioned in Planck Collaboration et al. (2020d) (see
precedented quality of the Planck Legacy data (Planck Col-              section 6.2), the asymmetry induced by the Doppler residual
laboration et al. 2020a).                                               modulation has smaller amplitude than the dominant dipole-
   In this paper we address one of the most notable anomalies,          modulation pattern and thus it has even lower significance.
the CMB power asymmetry, from a new angle. By analyz-                   Similarly, since our simulations include the lensing signal of
ing the Planck temperature anisotropy maps in small finite              the CMB temperature, lensing can not produce the cosmo-
patches, we find that the best-fit cosmological parameters for          logical anisotropy pattern we detect.
a simple ΛCDM model do show evidence for coherent varia-                   We have tested the robustness of our main results with
tions across the sky, that we dub ”horizons”. Although the es-          respect to foreground separation methods. In particular, we
timated significance of these horizons varies among the basic           found that only the spatial-variation map of the nuisance
set of cosmological parameters, we found that the probability           parameter that encodes residual small-scale foreground con-

                                                                                                                 MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
24      Fosalba & Gaztañaga
tamination changes as a function of the method, unlike the
cosmological parameter maps. As a further test, we have also
shown that the evidence for horizons in Planck temperature
maps is also robust to other possible contributions to the fore-
ground template used, such as dust emission on large scales
(see discussion in Section §3.4, and Figures 13-16). A quan-
titative assessment of the impact of foregrounds on the an-
gular power spectrum of the cosmological parameter maps is
summarized in Figure 17 showing the robustness of our re-
sults to the choice of component separation algorithm. More-
over, a comparison between Planck and WMAP results (see
Section §3.5) showed reasonable good agreement, albeit with
some differences, as expected from the lower signal to noise in
WMAP. This in turn points to the robustness of the detected
anisotropy patterns for experiments with different frequency
coverage, analysis pipelines, systematics and foreground sep-
aration methods.
   The estimated size of of these horizons range from ∼ 40 to           Figure 30. Angular 2-point correlation function of the Planck tem-
70 degrees in diameter, i.e, comparable to the largest scales           perature map (red solid line). For reference we also show the theory
where non-zero correlations are measured from CMB data                  prediction for the Planck best-fit ΛCDM cosmology (blue dashed
(see e.g, Planck Collaboration et al. 2020c). In particular,            line). Shaded areas display the 68 % Gaussian confidence intervals
Figure 30 shows the measurement of the angular 2-point cor-             (see text for details).
relation function from the Planck SMICA temperature map
over the ”common” mask that we have used in the main anal-
ysis of this paper, which leaves about 76% of the sky for
cosmological analysis. Although angular scales are strongly
correlated, our analysis shows that the signal is consistent
with zero for angular separations larger than ∼ 65 degrees, in
agreement with previous analyses using WMAP and Planck
data (Bennett et al. 2003; Gaztañaga et al. 2003; Copi et al.
2015; Schwarz et al. 2016). This lack of large-angle corre-
lations is at variance, given the statistical errors, with the
best-fit ΛCDM model to Planck data12 .
   From our analysis of the Planck temperature map, we find
ΩΛ ≃ 0.8 on average for H1 and H3 , which have estimated
sizes of θ(H1 ) ≃ 60 deg. and θ(H3 ) ≃ 40 deg. respectively,
and we find ΩΛ ≃ 0.6 on average for H2 , which has an esti-
mated size of θ(H2 ) ≃ 70 deg. Right panel of Figure 31 shows
the measurements for θ (in degrees) as a function of ΩΛ . We
also estimate the individual comoving scale χ for each hori-
zon as χ = θdA , where dA is the angular diameter distance
estimated with the cosmological parameters in each horizon
(see Fig.28). Results are shown in the left panel of Figure 31
                                                                        Figure 31. Left panel shows the Λ (χΛ , blue lines) and causal (
in units of c/H0 , with H0 = 67 Km/s/Mpc. Note that the
                                                                        χ§ , black lines) comoving horizons (in units of c/H0 , with H0 =
estimates for χ are independent from the ones for θ because                                                              −1/2
the latter are independent of H0 .                                      67km/s/Mpc) compared to the Hubble horizon ΩΛ       (dotted line)
                                                                        and the angular diameter distance dA (dashed red line). As we
   A ΛCDM universe is dynamically trapped inside the Hub-                                              −1/2
                        −1/2 c                                          increase ΩΛ , χ transits from ΩΛ    to dA , which increases with
ble horizon c/H = ΩΛ        H0
                               . In comoving coordinates this
                                                                        ΩΛ . The right panel shows the corresponding angles θ = χ/dA .
results in a maximum scale χΛ and angle θΛ :
                                                                        Points with errors show the measurements in the CMB.
       Z ∞                                   Z 1
             d ln a              χΛ                d ln a
χΛ ≡                  ⇒ θΛ ≡         ; dA ≡                  (8)
        0    aH(a)               dA           a   aH(a)
                                                                        to the observable universe today. So in transverse distances,
For a flat ΩΛ ≃ 0.7 we have χΛ ≃ 4.4c/H0 . This is close                this is a natural scale above which we could expect some
                                                                        anomalies in the CMB sky: θΛ ≡ χΛ /dA ≃ 79 degrees, where
12
                                                                        dA is the comoving angular diameter distance to the CMB
    We estimate the statistical errorbars from the diagonal of the      last scattering surface a ≃ 10−3 . The values of χΛ and θΛ
analytic Gaussian covariance matrix (see e.g. Eq.(16) in Cabré
                                                                        (blue lines in Figure 31) are close, but above, our horizon
et al. 2007). In particular, these theory errors use as input the
C` ’s which are then Legendre transformed to get the corresponding
                                                                        measurements.
errors in configuration space. Therefore, for consistency, we use the     Gaztañaga (2020, 2021b,a) has interpreted cosmic accel-
C` ’s measured from the data for the ”Planck” case, and the theory      eration as the result of causally disjoint cosmological hori-
ones according to the Planck best-fit cosmology for the ”ΛCDM”          zons or Black Hole Universes (BHU) of size comparable to
case (see Table 1)                                                      χΛ . Such BHU model could simply explain why dark-energy

MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
                                                                           Explaining Cosmological Anisotropy                   25
density is comparable to the dark-matter density today (the        rameter tensions reported in recent analyses that combined
”why now” issue) and address apparent cosmological param-          low and high redshift probes, without the need to invoke new
eter tensions (as H0 estimate from low versus high redshift        physics beyond our standard model.
data) as a consequence of the difference in parameter values
in disjoint BHU horizons. In particular, as discussed in Gaz-
tañaga (2020, 2021b), the causal boundary χ§ corresponding        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
to a given ΩΛ is slightly smaller than the Λ trapped surface
in Eq.8.This results from the zero action principle, which re-     This work is dedicated to the memory of my father, Marcelo.
lates ΩΛ with the average of matter and radiation within the       PF is specially grateful to K.Benabed and O.Doré for useful
light-cone. The relation between ΩΛ and the size of the BHU        comments on the draft, I.Tutusaus for advice with iMinuit,
is a key prediction of the model that we can test with the         and J.Guerrero for help with the Hidra computing clus-
measured CMB horizons.                                             ter at ICE. Hidra is funded by CSIC project EQC2019-
   Black lines in Figure 31 show the prediction for χ§ and θ§      005664-P, with european FEDER funds. The development of
as a function of ΩΛ from Eq.31 in Gaztañaga 2021b. There is       this project required 800, 000+ CPU hours at Hidra. Some
a very good agreement with the CMB measurements. We also           of the results in this paper have been derived using the
show the ”all-sky” measurement of the Planck 2-point angular       healpy (Zonca et al. 2019), HEALPix (Górski et al. 2005) and
correlation function (black symbols labeled as ”2-pt”). This       CAMB (Lewis et al. 2000) packages. We acknowledge support
”all-sky” measurement yields vanishing correlations for scales     from MINECO through grants ESP2017-89838-C3-1-R and
above θ ≃ 65 degrees for a best-fit value of ΩΛ ≈ 0.7 (see         PGC2019-102021-B-100, the H2020 European Union grants
Table 1), which is also consistent with the predictions from       LACEGAL 734374 and EWC 776247 with ERDF funds, and
Gaztañaga (2020, 2021b). Note that there is no free param-        Generalitat de Catalunya through CERCA to grant 2017-
eter in these predictions which where published (Gaztañaga        SGR-885 and funding to IEEC.
2020) before the CMB analysis presented here was done.
   The good agreement with the BHU predictions, in both an-
gular size and comoving scale, supports the idea of a physical     DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
origin for the anisotropies that we found in the cosmologi-
                                                                   The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable
cal parameter maps. The fact that we find a good fit to the
                                                                   request to the corresponding author.
same physical model of BAO (but with different parameters
in different regions of the sky, see Figure 29) makes it hard
to explain these anisotropies from systematics or any other
non-cosmological signals. It also indicates that the same un-      REFERENCES
derlying physical laws apply to different BHU horizons.            Aghanim N., Desert F. X., Puget J. L., Gispert R., 1996, A&A,
   In this paper we have not included polarization data, which         311, 1
could provide another handle on the evidence for anisotropy        Aiola S., Wang B., Kosowsky A., Kahniashvili T., Firouzjahi H.,
in cosmological parameter estimation (see e.g Paci et al. 2010;        2015, Phys. Rev. D, 92, 063008
Mukherjee 2015; Mukherjee & Souradeep 2016), and con-              Akrami Y., Fantaye Y., Shafieloo A., Eriksen H. K., Hansen F. K.,
                                                                       Banday A. J., Górski K. M., 2014, ApJ, 784, L42
strain the impact of the optical depth to reionization, τ , i.e,
                                                                   Axelsson M., Fantaye Y., Hansen F. K., Band ay A. J., Eriksen
possible ”patchy” reionization (Aghanim et al. 1996; Haiman            H. K., Gorski K. M., 2013, ApJ, 773, L3
& Loeb 1998; Gruzinov & Hu 1998; Haiman & Knox 1999)               Bennett C. L., et al., 2003, ApJS, 148, 1
on our results (Fosalba et al. in prep). However we anticipate     Bennett C. L., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 20
that since τ is strongly correlated with the primordial power      Cabré A., Fosalba P., Gaztañaga E., Manera M., 2007, MNRAS,
spectrum amplitude parameter, AS , that we have included in            381, 1347
our temperature analysis, a priori we do not expect this ad-       Chon G., Challinor A., Prunet S., Hivon E., Szapudi I., 2004, MN-
ditional parameter to have a significant impact. In addition,          RAS, 350, 914
the scale-cuts used (` > 32) should limit the main expected        Colin J., Mohayaee R., Sarkar S., Shafieloo A., 2011, MNRAS, 414,
contribution from the reionization signal.                             264
                                                                   Copi C. J., Huterer D., Schwarz D. J., Starkman G. D., 2015,
   In summary, we have found strong evidence for a violation
                                                                       MNRAS, 451, 2978
of the cosmological principle of isotropy from the analysis of     Dai L., Jeong D., Kamionkowski M., Chluba J., 2013, Phys.
the Planck 2018 temperature map. Our analysis points to sig-           Rev. D, 87, 123005
nificant deviations from statistical isotropy on cosmological      Eriksen H. K., Hansen F. K., Banday A. J., Górski K. M., Lilje
scales, with a probability ∼ 10−9 of being a Gaussian fluc-            P. B., 2004, ApJ, 605, 14
tuation. This is the largest reported evidence for a violation     Eriksen H. K., Banday A. J., Górski K. M., Hansen F. K., Lilje
of the Cosmological principle to our knowledge. These pa-              P. B., 2007, ApJ, 660, L81
rameter variations are consistent with the existence of three      Fosalba P., Szapudi I., 2004, ApJ, 617, L95
distinct patches or horizons with significantly different values   Gaztañaga E., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2766
                                                                   Gaztañaga E., 2021a, hal-03106344, darkcosmos.com
with respect to the the mean over the CMB sky. If the exis-
                                                                   Gaztañaga E., 2021b, MNRAS, 502, 436
tence of such horizons is confirmed in future analyses (e.g.,
                                                                   Gaztañaga E., Fosalba P., Elizalde E., 1998, MNRAS, 295, L35
in high-quality polarization data) this could lend further sup-    Gaztañaga E., Wagg J., Multamäki T., Montaña A., Hughes D. H.,
port to models that predict the existence of those horizons,           2003, MNRAS, 346, 47
such as the Gaztañaga (2020, 2021b,a) model. This in turn         Gordon C., 2007, ApJ, 656, 636
would open the door to unveil the nature of dark-energy and        Górski K. M., Hivon E., Banday A. J., Wand elt B. D., Hansen
cosmic acceleration, and resolve apparent cosmological pa-             F. K., Reinecke M., Bartelmann M., 2005, ApJ, 622, 759

                                                                                                          MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
26      Fosalba & Gaztañaga
Gruzinov A., Hu W., 1998, ApJ, 508, 435
Haiman Z., Knox L., 1999, in de Oliveira-Costa A., Tegmark
   M., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Se-
   ries Vol. 181, Microwave Foregrounds. p. 227 (arXiv:astro-
   ph/9902311)
Haiman Z., Loeb A., 1998, ApJ, 503, 505
Hajian A., Souradeep T., Cornish N., 2005, ApJ, 618, L63
Hansen F. K., Banday A. J., Górski K. M., Eriksen H. K., Lilje
   P. B., 2009, ApJ, 704, 1448
Hanson D., Lewis A., Challinor A., 2010, Phys. Rev. D, 81, 103003
Henrot-Versillé S., Perdereau O., Plaszczynski S., Rouillé d’Orfeuil
   B., Spinelli M., Tristram M., 2016, arXiv e-prints, p.
   arXiv:1607.02964
Ho M.-F., Chiang L.-Y., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1812.08980
Hoftuft J., Eriksen H. K., Banday A. J., Górski K. M., Hansen
   F. K., Lilje P. B., 2009, ApJ, 699, 985
Hu W., Fukugita M., Zaldarriaga M., Tegmark M., 2001, ApJ, 549,
   669
Huang Y., Addison G. E., Weiland J. L., Bennett C. L., 2018, ApJ,
   869, 38
Land K., Magueijo J., 2007, MNRAS, 378, 153
Lew B., 2008, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2008, 023
Lewis A., Challinor A., Lasenby A., 2000, ApJ, 538, 473
Martinelli M., Tutusaus I., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p.
   arXiv:1906.09189
Muir J., Adhikari S., Huterer D., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 023521
Mukherjee S., 2015, Phys. Rev. D, 91, 062002
Mukherjee S., Souradeep T., 2016, Phys. Rev. Lett., 116, 221301
Mukherjee S., Wandelt B. D., 2018, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.,
   2018, 042
Mukherjee S., Aluri P. K., Das S., Shaikh S., Souradeep T., 2016,
   J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2016, 042
Paci F., Gruppuso A., Finelli F., Cabella P., de Rosa A., Mandolesi
   N., Natoli P., 2010, MNRAS, 407, 399
Park Y., Rozo E., 2020, MNRAS,
Planck Collaboration et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A23
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016a, A&A, 594, A11
Planck Collaboration et al., 2016b, A&A, 594, A16
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020a, A&A, 641, A1
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020b, A&A, 641, A5
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020c, A&A, 641, A6
Planck Collaboration et al., 2020d, A&A, 641, A7
Prunet S., Uzan J.-P., Bernardeau F., Brunier T., 2005, Phys.
   Rev. D, 71, 083508
Quartin M., Notari A., 2015, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2015,
   008
Rassat A., Starck J. L., Paykari P., Sureau F., Bobin J., 2014,
   J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2014, 006
Riess A. G., 2019, Nature Reviews Physics, 2, 10
Riess A. G., Casertano S., Yuan W., Macri L. M., Scolnic D., 2019,
   ApJ, 876, 85
Samal P. K., Saha R., Jain P., Ralston J. P., 2009, MNRAS, 396,
   511
Schwarz D. J., Copi C. J., Huterer D., Starkman G. D., 2016,
   Classical and Quantum Gravity, 33, 184001
Secrest N., von Hausegger S., Rameez M., Mohayaee R., Sarkar S.,
   Colin J., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2009.14826
Shaikh S., Mukherjee S., Das S., Wand elt B. D., Souradeep T.,
   2019, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2019, 007
Szapudi I., Prunet S., Pogosyan D., Szalay A. S., Bond J. R., 2001,
   ApJ, 548, L115
Wong K. C., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 498, 1420
Zonca A., Singer L., Lenz D., Reinecke M., Rosset C., Hivon E.,
   Gorski K., 2019, Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1298


This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.


MNRAS 000, 1–26 (2020)
