     EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)




                                                                 CERN-EP-2026-048
                                                                   2026/08/27



       CMS-EXO-24-028



     A search for microscopic black holes, string balls, and
         sphalerons in proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV
2026
                         The CMS Collaboration*
Aug
26
                                    Abstract


        A search for microscopic black holes, string balls, and electroweak sphalerons using
             proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV recorded with the CMS detector at the CERN
         LHC during the 2016–2018 data taking, and corresponding to an integrated luminos-[hep-ex]
                 ity of 138 fb−1, is presented. Two search strategies based on control samples in data
              are used. Model-independent limits on the cross section of physics phenomena with
              multiple energetic jets, leptons, and photons are set using a method that relies on
              the shape invariance of the scalar sum of the transverse momenta of all objects in
              the event. Model-dependent limits on black hole and sphaleron production are set
             using a newly introduced method that has been developed for the identification of
               collider events with distinct kinematic features by separating them into classes based
           on phase space proximity. In the context of models with large extra dimensions, semi-
                classical black holes and string balls with masses below 8.4–11.4 TeV and 9.0–10.7 TeV,
               respectively, are excluded at 95% confidence level, significantly extending the reach
            beyond previous searches. Results of a dedicated search for electroweak sphalerons
              are used to derive an upper limit of 0.0034 at 95% confidence level on the fraction of
             quark-quark interactions, with a center-of-mass energy above the nominal sphaleronarXiv:2604.10732v2
               transition energy threshold of 9 TeV, that result in a sphaleron transition.


               Published in the Journal of High Energy Physics as doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2026)098.





      © 2026 CERN for the benefit of the CMS Collaboration. CC-BY-4.0 license

               *See Appendix A for the list of collaboration members



                                                                          1

1  Introduction

This paper describes a search for three theoretical objects predicted to exist at the TeV scale:
microscopic black holes (BHs), string balls (SBs), and sphalerons. Microscopic BHs are the
manifestation of certain theoretical scenarios beyond the standard model (BSM) that could ad-
dress open questions of the standard model (SM), such as the hierarchy problem. The Arkani-
Hamed–Dimopoulos–Dvali (ADD) [1–3] and Randall–Sundrum (RS) [4, 5] models address the
hierarchy problem by means of extra dimensions with properties that can explain gravity’s
apparent weakness in the standard 3+1 dimensions of space-time. In this paper, we present
the results of a search for manifestations of the ADD model. In this framework, the strength of
gravity is greatly increased when its extra dimensional components are taken into account. This
shifts the fundamental Planck scale (MD) downward to a level near the electroweak (EW) scale.
As a result, microscopic BH formation becomes possible for BHs with mass MBH ≥MD [6–8]. In
the semiclassical case where MBH is well above MD, the microscopic BHs quickly evaporate via
Hawking radiation [9] to a large number of energetic particles, such as gluons, quarks, leptons,
and photons. If MBH is close to MD, quantum effects become significant, altering the decays.
For example, quantum BHs decay before they thermalize and produce low-multiplicity final
states [10–12].

Another model based on string theory predicts that in the region between MD and the threshold
for BH formation, highly excited long, jagged SB states [13] can be produced with masses of
order MS/gS, where MS is the string scale and gS is the string coupling. The transition from
SBs to semiclassical BHs occurs for masses above MS/g2S.  Similar to semiclassical BHs, SB
evaporation yields a large number of SM particles.

Sphalerons are unstable solutions of the electroweak field equations corresponding to saddle-
point configurations of the electroweak potential [14, 15] that allow baryon and lepton number
violation, an essential requirement for the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe. In
the SM, there are twelve globally conserved currents Jµ = ψLγµψL, each corresponding to the
flavor conservation of one of the 12 fundamental fermions. When the conservation is broken
by the electroweak chiral anomaly, the integral of the divergence of these currents over space-
time produces what is known as the Chern–Simons number [15], NCS, which characterizes the
topological structure of the EW vacuum. Each sphaleron-induced transition is associated with
an NCS, resulting in a violation of baryon (B) and lepton (L) numbers by ∆B = ∆L = 3NCS,
such that ∆(B + L) = 6NCS and ∆(B −L) = 0. The sphaleron potential is a periodic potential
with minima (the vacua) characterized by the integer values of NCS. The energy required to
overcome the potential barriers between minima, known as the sphaleron transition energy
(Esph), is estimated to be around 9 TeV [16]. An anomaly only occurs when there is sufficient
energy to overcome the potential barrier. The minimal final state from a sphaleron transition,
corresponding to NCS = ±1, consists of 12 fermions: three charged leptons, three neutrinos,
and six quarks (one from each generation and color). Additional quark-antiquark pairs and
gauge bosons may also be produced in the process, leading to high-multiplicity final states,
potentially observable at the CERN LHC [16–18].

At the LHC, three types of objects discussed above could produce very similar event signatures
involving multiple leptons, photons, and jets that are distinct from SM backgrounds.
The ATLAS Collaboration published a search for BHs [19] using 3.6 fb−1 of data collected at
√s = 13 TeV that was recast by Ellis and Sakurai as a search for sphalerons [17]. The ATLAS
Collaboration also searched for quantum BHs in lepton+jet final states using a √s = 13 TeV
data set corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 140 fb−1 [20]. An analysis by CMS at
the same center-of-mass energy, based on 2016 data, corresponding to an integrated luminosity

2

of 35.9 fb−1, was reported in Ref. [21]. The search reported here is an update to the previous
CMS analysis. In addition to using a larger data set, we use a novel phase space metric to set
model-dependent limits, while also applying the shape invariance approach used in previous
CMS publications [21–25], to set model-independent limits.

The paper is organized as follows. The CMS detector and event reconstruction are presented in
Section 2. Section 3 describes the signal models considered and the associated simulated data
samples. Section 4 discusses the event reconstruction, while Section 5 introduces the variables
used in this search. The event selection is detailed in Section 6, followed in Section 7 by descrip-
tions of the two background estimation methods we employ. Section 8 presents the systematic
uncertainties associated with the signal simulation, and the results are shown in Section 9. The
paper is summarized in Section 10.

Tabulated results are provided in the HEPData record for this analysis [26].


2  The CMS detector

The central feature of the CMS apparatus is a superconducting solenoid of 6 m internal diam-
eter, providing a magnetic field of 3.8 T. Within the solenoid volume are a silicon pixel and
silicon strip tracker, a lead tungstate crystal electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL), and a brass
and scintillator hadron calorimeter (HCAL), each composed of a barrel and two endcap sec-
tions. Forward calorimeters extend the pseudorapidity (η) coverage provided by the barrel
and endcap detectors. Muons are measured in gas-ionization detectors embedded in the steel
flux-return yoke outside the solenoid. A more detailed description of the CMS detector, to-
gether with a definition of the coordinate system used and the relevant kinematic variables,
can be found in Refs. [27, 28].

The silicon tracker used in 2016 measured charged particles within the range |η| < 2.5. For
nonisolated particles of transverse momenta (pT) between 1 and 10 GeV, and |η| < 1.4, the
track resolutions were typically 1.5% in pT and 25–90 (45–150) µm in the transverse (longitu-
dinal) impact parameter [29]. At the start of 2017, a new pixel detector was installed [30]; the
upgraded tracker measured particles up to |η| = 3.0 with typical resolutions of 1.5% in pT and
20–75 µm in the transverse impact parameter [31] for nonisolated particles of 1 < pT < 10 GeV.
According to simulation studies [32], similar improvements are expected in the longitudinal
direction.

Events of interest are selected by a two-level trigger system. The first level, composed of cus-
tom hardware processors, uses information from the calorimeters and muon detectors to select
events at a rate of approximately 100 kHz within a fixed latency of approximately 4 µs [33]. The
second level, known as the high-level trigger (HLT), consists of a farm of processors running a
version of the full event reconstruction software optimized for fast processing. It reduces the
event rate to a few kHz before data storage [34, 35].


3  Data and simulated samples

The analysis is based on a data sample collected with the CMS detector from 2016 to 2018 in
proton-proton (pp) collisions at a center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV, corresponding to an inte-
grated luminosity of 138 fb−1.

The BH signal samples were produced at leading order using Monte Carlo (MC) simulation
with the BLACKMAX v2.02.0 [36] and CHARYBDIS2 v1.003 [37, 38] generators at √s = 13 TeV.

                                                                          3


The CHARYBDIS2 generator models BH decay primarily through semiclassical Hawking radi-
ation with graybody factors, while BLACKMAX offers more flexible parameterizations for the
decay spectra and different treatments of mass and angular momentum loss during evapora-
tion. The SB samples were generated using CHARYBDIS2. The sphaleron samples used the
BARYOGEN v1.0 [39] generator. Simulations for quantum chromodynamics (QCD) multijet
production with MADGRAPH5 aMC@NLO v2.2.2 [40] at leading order using the MLM match-
ing scheme [41] have been employed to guide the selection criteria and train machine-learning
models, as detailed in Section 6.

The BH samples were produced under different assumptions regarding the angular momen-
tum, energy loss, and decay mechanisms. Samples labeled with “B” were produced using the
BLACKMAX generator:

   • B1: nonrotating;
   • B2: rotating with no graviton emission included;
   • B3: rotating with energy and angular momentum loss (graviton emission included);

while those labeled with “C” were produced using the CHARYBDIS2 generator:

   • C1: rotating;
   • C2: nonrotating;
   • C3: rotating with the evaporation model in Ref. [42, 43];
   • C4: rotating with the Yoshino–Rychkov (YR) loss model [44], which is a conservative
    bound that includes impact parameter considerations;
   • C5: rotating, stable-remnant model [45–47], where the stable remnant must be a
     colorless object essentially equivalent to a quark-antiquark bound state;
   • C6: rotating, boiling remnant model [13, 48], where the remnant continues to evap-
     orate until a maximum Hawking temperature equal to MD is reached.

Furthermore, the samples were simulated with various combinations of model parameters.
For each model, the fundamental Planck scale MD is varied between 2 and 9 TeV in 1 TeV steps
and for every mass value, n = 2, 4, and 6 extra dimensions are used. The number of extra di-
mensions corresponds to representative benchmarks commonly used in previous searches and
spans a broad range of phenomenologically relevant models. The parameter grids are chosen to
provide adequate coverage of the accessible phase space while maintaining a manageable num-
ber of simulated samples. The signal model varies smoothly between neighboring simulated
mass points, making interpolation between them appropriate. This procedure was validated by
comparing limits obtained from interpolated signal templates at intermediate mass points with
those obtained by interpolating between limits at neighboring simulated mass points, yielding
very similar results. As BH production is a threshold phenomenon, we search for BHs above
a certain minimum mass MminBH . We vary MminBH in simulation from (MD + 1) TeV to 12 TeV in
1 TeV steps.

The production of SBs depends on two parameters, the string scale MS and the string coupling
gS. For all SB samples, n = 6 is used. In weakly-coupled string scenarios compactified to 4 + n
dimensions, MD and the string parameters are related by [48],

                                             −( n−22  )
                       MD = g S    MS.                                        (1)

In simulation, the string scale MS is varied from 1 to 4 TeV in 0.5 TeV steps. For each mass value,
gS values of 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 are used, while the minimum mass of SBs ranges from 7 to 12 TeV

4


in steps of 1 TeV. These parameter ranges cover both the formation of SBs and their transition
to semiclassical BHs.

Sphaleron production depends on two parameters, Esph and NCS. The parameter Esph is scanned
in a range from 8.5 to 9.5 TeV in steps of 0.25 TeV. Since the sphaleron transition is exponen-
tially suppressed by |NCS|, only NCS = ±1 are simulated. The probability of NCS = +1 is
denoted as p(NCS). The p(NCS) values of 0%, 50%, and 100% were used, where, for example,
p(NCS) = 50% means half of the events have NCS = +1 and half have NCS = −1.

The theoretical cross section for sphaleron production is calculated in terms of the partonic
cross section [18],
                  √      psph  √
                                            ˆσ(   ˆs) =    Θ(    ˆs −Esph),                                  (2)
                                 m2W

where mW is the mass of the W boson, ˆs is the square of the partonic center-of-mass energy, and
Θ is the Heaviside step function. The partonic cross section is parameterized by the two pa-
rameters Esph and psph, where the latter is a dimensionless phenomenological pre-exponential
factor that scales the reference sphaleron production cross section above the threshold Esph.
The sphaleron samples were generated assuming psph = 1, which facilitates setting a limit on
this factor.

In all MC samples, PYTHIA v8.205 was used for hadronization with tune CP5 [49]. The par-
ton distribution function (PDF) set used in simulation is NNPDF3.1 at next-to-next-to-leading
order in perturbative QCD [50]. Simulated minimum bias events are superimposed on the pri-
mary collision to mimic the impact of additional interactions that occur in the same or adjacent
bunch crossings (pileup) [51].


4  Event reconstruction

For this analysis, which focuses on searching for signals at the TeV scale, events are selected
using an HLT criterion based on the scalar sum of transverse momenta of the reconstructed jets
(HT) in the event. The lowest HT threshold that ensures optimal performance and data coverage
is chosen. For data taken in the year 2016 this threshold is 900 GeV, while for 2017–2018 it is
1050 GeV. The resulting trigger selection is fully efficient for events that subsequently satisfy
the offline requirements used in the analysis. Beyond the HLT requirement, a preselection of
ST > 2 TeV is applied, where ST is defined as the scalar sum of the transverse momenta of
all reconstructed objects in the event. The subsequent requirements described in this section
define the full event selection used in the analysis, for which particles are reconstructed using
the particle-flow (PF) algorithm [52].

The PF algorithm aims to identify each individual particle in an event, with an optimized
combination of information from the various elements of the CMS detector. The energy of
photons is obtained from the ECAL measurement. The energy of electrons is determined
from a combination of the electron momentum at the primary interaction vertex as deter-
mined by the tracker, the energy of the corresponding ECAL cluster, and the energy sum of all
bremsstrahlung photons spatially compatible with emission from the electron along its curved
track. The energy of muons is obtained from the curvature of the corresponding track. The
energy of charged hadrons is determined from a combination of their momentum measured
in the tracker and the matching ECAL and HCAL energy deposits, corrected for the response
function of the calorimeters to hadronic showers.  Finally, the energy of neutral hadrons is
obtained from the corresponding corrected ECAL and HCAL energies.

                                                                          5


The primary vertex is taken to be the vertex corresponding to the hardest scattering in the
event, evaluated using tracking information alone, as described in Section 9.4.1 of Ref. [53].
Events are required to contain a primary vertex within 24 cm of the nominal collision point
along the beam axis and within 2 cm in the transverse direction.

Jets are clustered from PF particles using the anti-kT algorithm with a distance parameter
R = 0.4. The jet momentum is determined as the vectorial sum of all particle momenta in
the jet, and is found from simulation to be within 5 to 10% of the true momentum over the
whole pT spectrum and detector acceptance. Jet energy corrections are derived from simula-
tion to bring the average measured jet energy into agreement with that of particle-level jets.
In situ measurements of the momentum balance in dijet, γ+jets, and Z+jets events are used to
determine any residual differences between the jet energy scale in data and in simulation, and
appropriate corrections are applied [54]. Pileup interactions can contribute additional tracks
and calorimetric energy depositions to the jet momentum. To mitigate this effect, charged par-
ticles matched to pileup vertices are removed and an offset correction is applied to correct for
remaining neutral-particle contributions [55]. All jets are required to have pT > 70 GeV, and
pseudorapidity |η| < 2.5. The threshold of 70 GeV is chosen consistently for all reconstructed
objects to ensure sufficient signal acceptance while preserving sensitivity across a wide range
of signal samples. Additional selection criteria [56] are applied to each jet to remove those orig-
inating from calorimetric noise. An event-level filter is applied such that the energy fraction
carried by muon candidates in the leading pT jet that fails the standard identification must be
less than 80%. This requirement removes events in which a low-momentum muon is misrecon-
structed with very high momentum and misidentified as a high-energy jet.

Electrons are reconstructed as charged-particle tracks with additional energy depositions in the
ECAL [57]. A requirement of pseudorapidity |η| < 2.5 is applied to all electrons. Identification
criteria make use of a discriminant that combines information on the reconstructed electron
and its isolation from other activity in the event. Additional constraints on the transverse and
longitudinal impact parameters of electron tracks ensure consistency with the primary vertex.
The chosen discriminant working point corresponds to a selection efficiency of approximately
80% [58].

Photon reconstruction is based on information from the electromagnetic calorimeter with the
requirement of no matched charged-particle tracks. As for electrons, a requirement of pseu-
dorapidity |η| < 2.5 is applied along with an identification discriminant working point that
achieves approximately 80% efficiency [58].

Muon candidates are reconstructed using the PF algorithm and are categorized as global
muons [59], by the combined fit of tracks in the silicon tracker and the muon system. Tight
selection criteria are then applied to remove misidentified muons from hadronic decays or
hadron shower remnants [60]. An isolation requirement is applied to reduce contamination
from nonprompt muons originating from decays of hadrons within jets. Muon candidates are
required to have pseudorapidity |η| < 2.4.

An object arbitration procedure is used to disambiguate objects in the event.  It is applied to
photons and jets using a cone centered on their reconstructed approximate trajectories, of size   √
∆R =   (∆η)2 + (∆ϕ)2 = 0.4. The arbitration proceeds in a specific hierarchical order as fol-
lows. First, all leptons are retained. Next, photons are selected only if there is no lepton in the
cone. Finally, jets are selected from the remaining objects, provided that there is no lepton or
photon in the cone.
The missing transverse momentum vector ⃗p Tmiss is defined as the projection onto the plane

6


perpendicular to the beam axis of the negative vector sum of the momenta of all reconstructed
PF objects in an event [61]. Its magnitude is referred to as pmissT    . The jet energy corrections are
propagated into the pmissT   reconstruction.

5  Observables

The key observables used in this analysis to discriminate between signal and background in-
clude the scalar sum of transverse momenta of all objects in the event (ST), sphericity (S) [62–
64], and in the case of the model-dependent search, a novel phase space distance metric is also
employed. The objects in an event are jets, electrons, photons, muons, and missing transverse
momentum (pmissT    ).

5.1  Scalar sum of transverse momenta

The ST variable is defined as the scalar sum of the pT of all objects in the event,
                                  N  !
                               ST = ∑ pTi + pmissT    .                                     (3)
                                               i=1

The ST distributions for various signal models, together with that of the QCD multijet back-
ground, are shown in Fig. 1 (left). Among BH signals, we use the B1 model with n = 2 and
MD = 2 TeV as a representative case for the description of the analysis, including many figures
and resulting exclusions. Where relevant, figures focus on the MBH and MD mass points near
exclusion. Other models are treated similarly and the limits associated with them are included
in the final exclusion plots in section 9. For the sphaleron signal, the nominal Esph = 9 TeV with
different p(NCS) assumptions is shown.

The shape of the ST distribution for background processes, which is dominated by QCD mul-
tijet background, is assumed to be independent of the object multiplicity, N. This facilitates
the modeling of the background from control regions (CRs) and the extension of its prediction
to higher multiplicities where BSM physics signals may be present. This is discussed in more
detail in Section 7.1.

5.2  Sphericity

Sphericity is a measure of how isotropic an event is, and it is employed to improve signal
sensitivity. In this paper, sphericity is defined as follows:

                                          2λ2                                S =               ,                                           (4)
                                         λ2 + λ1
where λ1 and λ2 are the eigenvalues of the transverse momentum tensor,

                                 1      1                                     "  p2xi    pxipyi #                         SLxy =   ∑                                     ,                              (5)                                ∑i pTi    i  pTi   pxipyi    p2yi

where the index i extends over all objects passing our selection criteria. The definition of
sphericity in this paper is restricted to the transverse plane and has been referred to as trans-
verse sphericity [63, 64]. Signal events tend to be more spherical than background events due
to the isotropic decays of BHs and sphalerons. Therefore, it is expected that the sphericity dis-
tribution for signal events will be shifted towards higher values compared to the QCD multijet
background, as shown in Fig. 1 (right). As the mass of the BH increases, its temperature de-
creases, which results in a larger number of softer objects emitted in the process of evaporation.
BH models with higher MBH tend to have a more pronounced shift to higher sphericity values.

5.3  Phase space distance                                                      7


         CMSSimulation                       (13 TeV)          CMSSimulation                       (13 TeV)      102                                                 101
              QCD multijet                    B1: MD=9 TeV, MBH=10 TeV                    QCD multijet                    B1: MD=9 TeV, MBH=10 TeV
                     B1: MD=2 TeV, MBH=11 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0                           B1: MD=2 TeV, MBH=11 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0
      101      B1: MD=4 TeV, MBH=10 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0.5                          B1: MD=4 TeV, MBH=10 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0.5   events            B1: MD=6 TeV, MBH=10 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=1         events 100      B1: MD=6 TeV, MBH=10 TeV      Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=1
 of 100                         of
           1                                           10 1     10    Fraction    2                                                                                                   Fraction    2     10                                             10

     10 3
                                                    10 3
     10 4
           5                                           10 4     10

     10 6                                           10 5          2      4      6      8     10     12              0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0
                             ST [TeV]                                     Sphericity

Figure 1: The ST (left) and sphericity (right) distributions for various BH (with n = 2) and
sphaleron signal models are plotted along with the corresponding distributions for simulated
QCD multijet background events. The distributions are normalized to unit area.

5.3  Phase space distance

Novel representations of collider data play an increasingly important role in modern machine
learning methods. For example, optimal transport distances using energy flow distributions,
have given rise to a new geometry of collider events [65–67] that has widespread applications
in particle physics [68–72]. However, less attention has been given to the intrinsic geometry of
the phase space manifold where scattering amplitudes are defined. A natural distance between
collider events with N objects was proposed in Ref. [73]. To this end, a covariant description
of the massless N-body phase space manifold ΠN is presented and shown to be isomorphic
to the product space of an (N −1)-simplex ∆N−1 and a (2N −3)-hypersphere S2N−3: ΠN ∼=
∆N−1 ⊗S2N−3. Explicit and global coordinates of the phase space, ⃗ρ for the simplex and ⃗v for
the hypersphere, are obtained via transforms of the four-vectors of the N objects in the event.

A practical metric for collider events using global phase space coordinates was developed and
tailored to the structure of events at hadron colliders in the center-of-mass frame [74]. After
pre-processing the collider events and the manifold, the metric distance between two events,
A and B, is defined by

             s             3−2N                          N−1
                               1     c  3N−4             1    c  3N−4
           dΠ(⃗ρA,⃗v′A;⃗ρB,⃗v′B) =                  d2∆(⃗ρA,⃗ρB) +              d2S(⃗v′A,⃗v′B),        (6)                            16π2  4                4π2  4

where d∆is the distance on the simplex, dS is the distance on the hypersphere, and c serves as
a relative reweighting factor that gives rise to equally valid phase space distances. The relative
reweighting factor is optimized to maximize the performance of the phase space distance in dis-
tinguishing signal from background events. In this analysis, we use the ratio sphere : simplex
= 4  : 1, defined as the ratio of the coefficients that multiply the hypersphere term d2S and the
simplex term d2∆in Eq. (6). For any object multiplicity N this ratio of coefficients reduces to c, so
the choice 4 : 1 corresponds to setting c = 4. The definitions of the coordinates and derivations
of the distances can be found in Ref. [74]. When combined with downstream machine-learning
algorithms, the phase space distance achieves approximately 80% accuracy in distinguishing
top quark pair production events from QCD dijet events in MC simulations.

8


Given that the dimension of the phase space manifold depends on the particle multiplicity
N, a consistent means of defining the distance between events with different multiplicities is
needed. In this work, we achieve this by fixing the number of objects per event to N = 30. This
number covers the highest multiplicity seen in signal MC samples. When fewer than 30 objects
are available in an event, the remaining entries are ‘zero-padded’, i.e., they are assigned a value
of zero for subsequent calculations.


6  Event selection

A sphericity requirement of S > 0.1, is applied to reject background events, particularly at
low ST, where background contamination is highest. The sphericity requirement is determined
from a scan of the sphericity threshold, evaluating the expected significance for all signal mod-
els considered. With the S > 0.1 selection, an average improvement in sensitivity of approxi-
mately 70% is observed across the signal models used in this search. While a small number of
models show a mild reduction in significance, the majority of signal models have a substantial
gain, with improvements up to ∼200%.

A preselection requirement of N ≥3 objects is applied for the background fit in the model-
independent search described in Section 7.1, while N ≥4 objects is required for the phase
space distance method described in Section 7.2.

Due to the high dimensionality of the phase space manifold, the phase space distance, de-
fined in Section 5, is not an optimal discriminator on its own and so it is combined with a
machine-learning classifier to enhance the separation between signal and background. The
support vector machine (SVM) [75] classifier is chosen for this purpose because of its efficacy
in handling high-dimensional data and because of its intrinsic design that makes it a natural
choice for processing distance-based inputs. Using pairwise phase space distances as input,
the SVM classifies events by constructing a maximum-margin hyperplane that maximizes the
distance to the nearest data points from each class. This approach is more interpretable than
a “black-box” neural network because the decision boundary (hyperplane) is constructed with
physically motivated phase space distances. The radial basis function is used as the kernel to
provide a non-linear generalization for the SVM classifier,

                                   k(⃗xA;⃗xB) = exp −γd(⃗xA;⃗xB)2   ,                                (7)
where d(⃗xA;⃗xB) = dΠ(⃗ρA,⃗v′A;⃗ρB,⃗v′B) is the phase space distance between event A and event
B, and γ is a hyperparameter that controls the width of the kernel, which is optimized during
the validation step of the training. The SVM model provides a probability for how signal-like
an event is, which is used as the SVM score in the subsequent analysis. To train the SVM, a
simulated QCD multijet sample is used for background, and a mixture of mass points in the
nonrotating B1 model with n = 2 extra dimensions is used as signal. This general model was
evaluated on other signals, including sphalerons, and demonstrated good performance. This
is likely because the B1 model with n = 2 is the most background-like, and so cases where the
signal is further from the background in this metric are less challenging to distinguish.

Figure 2 shows the SVM score distributions normalized to equal area for simulated QCD multi-
jet background and selected signal models, before (left) and after (right) the sphericity require-
ment.

The value of the SVM score used to define the final signal search region (SR) in data is optimized
to maximize signal sensitivity as measured by the Punzi figure of merit [76] with σ = 5 and
is found to be 0.63 for several signal models. To evaluate the stability of the results near this

                                                                          9


         CMSSimulation                      (13 TeV)           CMSSimulation                      (13 TeV)      0.35                                                  0.35
             QCD multijet              N  4, ST > 2 TeV                  QCD multijet           N  4, ST > 2 TeV, S > 0.1
                    B1: MD=2 TeV, MBH=11 TeV                                                B1: MD=2 TeV, MBH=11 TeV   events 0.30       B1: MD=4 TeV, MBH=10 TeV                                    events 0.30       B1: MD=4 TeV, MBH=10 TeV
                    B1: MD=6 TeV, MBH=10 TeV                                                B1: MD=6 TeV, MBH=10 TeV of                           of
                    B1: MD=9 TeV, MBH=10 TeV                                                B1: MD=9 TeV, MBH=10 TeV
      0.25       Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0                        0.25       Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0
                     Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0.5                                             Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=0.5
      0.20       Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=1                        0.20       Sphaleron: E=9 TeV, p(NCS)=1    Fraction                                                                                                            Fraction

      0.15                                                  0.15

      0.10                                                  0.10

      0.05                                                  0.05

      0.00                                                  0.00          0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0            0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0
                     SVM score                      SVM score

Figure 2: The SVM score distributions for simulated QCD multijets, and selected BH (with
n = 2) and sphaleron models, before (left) and after (right) the sphericity requirement. The
distributions are normalized to unit area.

choice, the threshold was shifted to 0.5 or 0.7 resulting in a 4 to 25% variation in the yield of
signal events, depending on the mass point.

Figure 3 shows distributions of SVM score versus ST for simulated QCD multijet background
events (left) and the BH signal model B1 with MD = 2 TeV, MBH = 10 TeV, and n = 2 (right).
Clear separation between signal and background is observed.


7  Background prediction methods

The dominant background is expected to originate from QCD multijet events. The contribu-
tion from processes, like tt, W+jets or Z+jets, is found to be negligible. As noted above, the
searches presented in this paper follow two different approaches. The two approaches also
entail different background prediction methods.

7.1  Shape invariance method

The shape invariance (SI) approach, following previous CMS publications on this topic [21–25],
assumes ST invariance with respect to the multiplicity N, which allows for an estimate of the
QCD background across samples selected with different minimum multiplicities. Simulation
studies confirm that the shape of the ST distribution remains consistent across multiplicities,
allowing the use of low-multiplicity events to model the ST distribution of high-multiplicity
backgrounds. Deviations associated with initial-state radiation and the selection on sphericity
are taken into account by additional systematic uncertainties, as described in Section 8.

The method proceeds by first fitting 16 analytic functions to the ST distribution from events
with multiplicity N = 3 in a control region (SI-CR). These functional forms have been com-
monly used in previous searches to model the QCD ST spectrum and are known to provide a
good description of the data within the fit region. The SI-CR, which spans from ST = 2.5 TeV to
ST = 5.2 TeV, is optimized to ensure robust background estimation, while maintaining negligi-
ble signal contamination. To ensure a physically meaningful behavior of the background pre-

10

    CMS Simulation              (13 TeV)  × 10−3      CMS Simulation              (13 TeV)  × 10−3     1                                       1
                      QCD Multijet     3.5    0.9                      S > 0.1               0.9                                   1.8score                                                                      eventsscore                                                                                                                                                 events    0.8                             3                                                    0.8                                   1.6
                       of                                                ofSVM 0.7                                         SVM 0.7                                   1.4                                          2.5
    0.6                                             0.6                                   1.2
                                   2    0.5                                             0.5                             1                                                                                             Fraction                                                                                            Fraction    0.4                                   1.5       0.4                                   0.8
    0.3                                             0.3                                   0.6                                   1
    0.2                                             0.2                                   0.4
                                                                  B1, M                                                                = 2 TeV, M                                                                          = 10 TeV, n = 2                                          0.5                                                                            D                                                                                        BH                                                                                          0.2    0.1                                                    0.1                                                   S > 0.1
     0                             0         0                             0
      2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7             2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12
                 ST [TeV]                       ST [TeV]
Figure 3: The SVM score vs. the ST distributions for simulated QCD multijet background (left)
and the BH signal model B1 with MD = 2 TeV, MBH = 10 TeV, and n = 2 (right), after the
S > 0.1 selection.

diction, functions that do not exhibit a monotonically decreasing behavior over the relevant ST
range are excluded. All remaining candidate functions provide an acceptable description of the
data in the SI-CR, as determined by goodness-of-fit tests. The choice of the nominal function is
based on a comparison of the integrals of the candidate functions in the range 5 < ST < 7 TeV.
The function whose integral is closest to the central value, defined as the average of the mean
and median of the set of accepted functions, is selected as the nominal function. This function
defines the nominal background shape prediction. The spread among the accepted functions
is treated as a systematic uncertainty, as described in Section 8. This function is then prop-
agated to higher multiplicities of the final-state objects. The nominal function, chosen to be
representative of the central behavior of the accepted function set, is given by

                                                             1/3  p1
                                           p0 1 −  S′T
                                                     f (ST) =                                  ,                                   (8)
                                                      p2+p3 ln S′T                                                  S′T

                = 0, 1, 2, 3) are the fit parameters.where S′T = ST/√s and pi (i

For each multiplicity threshold, the background estimate is normalized within a specific low-
ST window. The boundaries of this window are determined using simulated QCD multijet
events. The window begins at the ST value where the ratio relative to the exclusive N = 3 dis-
tribution reaches 99% of its plateau value. The exclusive N = 3 distribution refers to the fitted
background function obtained from the 2.5–5.2 TeV range. The window then extends 400 GeV
beyond this threshold, ensuring that there is a sufficient number of events in the normalization
region. The regions of ST between 2.5 and 5.2 TeV then serve as a validation region (SI-VR) to
ensure that the background estimation works well in data. The ST range directly above this
region defines the signal region (SI-SR). Figure 4 shows that the prediction in SI-VR describes
the data within the uncertainties for different multiplicity thresholds, including both low and
high multiplicities.

7.2  Phase space distance method                                               11


    CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)       CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)     106                                                                104
                         Data                                                                               DataTeV    N  4, S > 0.1                                           TeV    N  7, S > 0.1
     105                   Background                           103                   Background
0.2                     Background uncertainty      0.2                      Background uncertainty
/             /
Events 104103                                                                            Events 102101


     102                                                                100


     101                                                         10 1      1                                                            1
 Pred.   0                                                                                             Pred.   0
-                    -    Unc.                                                                               Unc.
 Data  -1                                                                          Data  -1                3.0        3.5        4.0        4.5        5.0                   3.6    3.8    4.0    4.2    4.4    4.6    4.8    5.0    5.2
                           ST [TeV]                               ST [TeV]

Figure 4: The ST distribution in the N ≥4 (left) and N ≥7 (right) in the SI-VR in data is
indicated by the black dots. The background prediction is represented by the red line, and
the gray band corresponds to the background modeling uncertainty. The lower panels show
the difference between observed data and the background prediction, normalized by the total
uncertainty.

7.2  Phase space distance method

The background prediction method for the phase space (PS) distance approach is the Alphabet
method [77], which relies on control samples in data as described below.

First, the SVM score is used to define regions enriched in background and depleted of signal.
The SR, referred to as the PASS region, contains events with SVM score greater than or equal to
0.63. The CR, also referred to as the FAIL region, is defined by the complementary set of events
with a score smaller than 0.63. All events are required to satisfy N ≥4 and S > 0.1 as discussed
in the previous section.

Binned ST distributions are then created for both PASS and FAIL regions. The background
yields in the PASS region are estimated from the observed data distribution in the FAIL region,
multiplied by a transfer function RP/F(j),

                             NbkgPASS(j) = RP/F(j) NbkgFAIL(j),                                  (9)

where NbkgPASS(j) is the estimated background yield in the j-th bin of the ST distribution in the
PASS region, NbkgFAIL(j) is a floating parameter that determines the background yield in the j-
th bin of the ST distribution in the FAIL region, which is constrained to values close to the
observed data yield in the fit described below, and RP/F(j) is the value of the pass-to-fail ratio
for bin  j. The RP/F ratio is modeled by an exponential function to ensure a positive yield.
Higher-order polynomials were found to have comparable performance when evaluated by
the Fisher F-test [78, 79].

Finally, a binned maximum likelihood fit is performed simultaneously in the PASS and FAIL
regions to extract both the background model, including the parameters of the RP/F(j) function
and the binned background yield in the FAIL region, and the signal strength. All correlations
between the parameters of the RP/F(j) function and the nuisance parameters are accounted for

12


by construction.

The method performs well in tests with MC simulations. To test the method with data, a val-
idation region (VR), defined by inverting the sphericity requirement to S < 0.1 is used. The
VR-FAIL and VR-PASS regions are once again separated by the SVM score of 0.63. The post-fit
distributions of the ST variable in the VR-FAIL and VR-PASS regions are shown in the left and
right plots of Fig. 5, respectively. The signal mass point B1, MD = 2 TeV, MBH = 10 TeV, and
n = 2 is also shown in the plots and indicates that there is negligible signal contamination. The
pull distributions in the PASS region, namely the distributions of the ratios plotted in the lower
panels, are found to be approximately symmetrical, with standard deviations consistent with
unity and centered near zero. The observed saturated log-likelihood p-value in the VR-PASS
region is higher than 0.05, indicating good agreement between the background prediction and
the data. The higher level of agreement between the model and the data in the VR-FAIL region
arises because this region is used to constrain the background estimate.





Figure 5: Post-fit ST distributions in VR-FAIL (left) and VR-PASS (right) regions in data. The
gray hatched areas include both statistical and systematic uncertainties in the background pre-
diction (yellow histogram). The red line corresponds to the signal model B1, with MD = 2 TeV,
MBH = 10 TeV, and n = 2. The lower panels show the difference between observed data and
the background prediction, normalized by the total uncertainty.


8  Systematic uncertainties

The systematic uncertainties are incorporated as nuisance parameters and are profiled in the
maximum likelihood fit.

The uncertainty in the integrated luminosity is applied as a 0.73% uncertainty affecting the
signal normalization [80]. The uncertainty associated with pileup is estimated by varying the
total inelastic cross section [81], which is used to compute the event weights, by one standard
deviation. This variation is then applied to the signal events to match the pileup distribution
observed in data. The resulting variations due to the pileup uncertainty are below 1% across
all signal mass points.

The uncertainties in the jet energy corrections [61, 82, 83] are included in both background
estimation methods. This leads to subdominant (< 1%) uncertainties.

                                                                         13


For the SI background estimation method, the primary sources of systematic uncertainty are
associated with extrapolating the background from the CR to the SR and its normalization.
The extrapolation uncertainty arises from the procedure used to model the background and it
accounts for the range of possible background functions that fit the data in the fit region. The
uncertainty is derived from the envelope of the highest and lowest fits obtained from the 16
test functions, which vary with multiplicity and ST. For ST > 5.2 TeV, where the background
prediction relies on an extrapolation beyond the fit region, this procedure results in a conser-
vative uncertainty of approximately 50% in the nominal background prediction for all values
of N.

An additional uncertainty is introduced to account for residual variations and possible non-
invariance in the low-ST region due to initial-state radiation. This uncertainty is assigned a
baseline value of 30% and increases with ST, reaching up to 120% in the high-ST region. A back-
ground normalization uncertainty associated with the procedure described above accounts for
variations in the low-ST normalization region, and ranges from 0.6 to 10%, depending on mul-
tiplicity.

For the PS method, the background uncertainty has two sources: the statistical uncertainty in
the background yield in the FAIL region, which varies from 1% to 100% as ST increases, and
the statistical uncertainty in RP/F, which varies from 1% to 10% depending on ST.

Both methods are statistically limited.


9  Results

The results of the search are extracted by performing a simultaneous maximum likelihood fit
with the CMS statistical analysis tool COMBINE [84], which is based on the ROOFIT [85] and
ROOSTATS [86] frameworks. They are interpreted in terms of model-independent limits on
BSM physics in energetic, multiparticle final states, and as model-dependent limits for a set of
semiclassical BH and SB scenarios, as well as for EW sphalerons.

Limits are set using the CLs method [87–89] with log-normal priors in the likelihood to con-
strain the nuisance parameters near their best fit values. We do not use the asymptotic approx-
imation of the CLs method [90], as most models in the search region have very low expected
background, a condition for which the asymptotic approximation is known to overestimate the
search sensitivity.

9.1  Model-independent results

Figure 6 shows the ST distribution in the SI-SR in data along with the background prediction
and its uncertainty. No significant deviation in data compared to the expected SM background
is observed.
Model-independent 95% confidence level (CL) limits on the signal cross section for ST > SminT
times acceptance (A) are derived for a generic signal producing events above a threshold SminT    .
These limits do not rely on assumptions about the signal model’s properties or production
mechanism. Acceptance is defined with respect to a fiducial phase space corresponding to the
full event and object selection used in the analysis. This includes the requirements on recon-
structed objects, event multiplicity, and the sphericity selection S > 0.1. For sphaleron signal
models, the acceptance is typically high, ranging from 89% to 93%. For microscopic black hole
signals, the acceptance depends strongly on the mass point and model parameters. In the case
of the B1 model, the acceptance varies between approximately 50% and 90% across the consid-

14


    CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)       CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)      103                                                                103
                          Data                                                                               DataTeV    N  4, S > 0.1                                            TeV    N  7, S > 0.1
                          Background                                           Background
0.2 102                   Background uncertainty      0.2 102                   Background uncertainty
/              /

      101                                                                101Events                                                                                 Events

      100                                                                100


    10 1                                                         10 1
       2                                                            2
  Pred.   0                                                                                             Pred.   0
-                    -     Unc.                                                                               Unc.
  Data  -2                                                                          Data  -2            5.5    6.0    6.5    7.0    7.5    8.0    8.5    9.0                     5.5    6.0    6.5    7.0    7.5    8.0    8.5    9.0
                           ST [TeV]                               ST [TeV]

Figure 6: The ST distribution in the N ≥4 (left) and N ≥7 (right) SI-SR in data, indicated by
 the black dots, along with the background prediction and its uncertainty represented by the
red line and gray band, respectively. The error bars on the data points correspond to Poisson
confidence intervals associated with the observed event counts. Lower panel as in Fig. 4.

ered parameter space. The observed number of events in the SI-SR sample is compared to the
expected number of background events coming from the extrapolation of the fitted function,
allowing for a limit to be set on any excess of events that could indicate the presence of a signal.

Figure 7 (left) shows the expected median limits, with 68% and 95% quantile bands, and ob-
served limits for N ≥4. We show the observed limits for different object multiplicity thresholds
 in Fig. 7 (right) as functions of the ST threshold. The observed limits show an improvement of
about a factor of 4 over the previous CMS analysis [21]. The gain comes from both the increased
 integrated luminosity and the enhanced background rejection provided by the sphericity selec-
 tion.

9.2  Model-dependent results

Model-dependent results are derived using the PS method for background estimation, with
 limits set using the ST distribution in the SR, defined by N ≥4, S > 0.1, and SVM score > 0.63.
The background prediction and observed data for the PS method are shown in Fig. 8, together
with the B1 model at n = 2 with MD = 2 TeV, MBH = 10 TeV (red) and with MD = 3 TeV,
MBH = 10 TeV (blue) as examples of expected signal distributions. No significant deviation in
data compared to the expected SM background is observed.

 In Fig. 9, we compare the observed upper limits on the signal cross section to the predicted
 cross section. In the B1 model with n = 2, values of MBH below 11.0 TeV are excluded for
MD = 2 TeV, and values below 10.4 TeV are excluded for MD = 4 TeV.

The observed limit lies below the median expected limit at lower MBH values because the ob-
served yield in the PASS region around 4 TeV in ST, visible in Fig. 8, is below the predicted
background. While this bin contributes negligibly to the limits at high MBH, signal models
with lower threshold masses populate this region of ST. The 68% and 95% expected uncer-
 tainty bands narrow with increasing MBH as the background prediction becomes very small
causing the expected limits to approach the background-free regime where the exclusion is de-

9.2  Model-dependent results                                                   15


    CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)       CMS                     138 fb 1 (13 TeV)    101                                                     101
[fb]                                                                          [fb]
)      N  4, S > 0.1          95% CL upper limits   )      S > 0.1     Observed 95% CL upper limits
 T                           TSmin                              Observed                Smin                             N  3
>                               Expected    >                             N  4(ST                                                     (ST    100                     68% expected            100                          N  5
A                         95% expected   A                             N  6
                                                                     N  7
                                                                     N  8
   10 1                                               10 1



   10 2                                               10 2


          5.5   6.0   6.5   7.0   7.5   8.0   8.5   9.0                 5.5   6.0   6.5   7.0   7.5   8.0   8.5   9.0
                                              SminT  [TeV]                                                    SminT  [TeV]

Figure 7: Expected and observed model-independent 95% CL upper limits on the cross section
times acceptance for multiplicity N ≥4, where the inner (outer) band represents the 68% (95%)
quantile of the expected limit (left), and the observed limits with different minimum object
multiplicity requirements (right).





Figure 8: Post-fit ST distributions in the FAIL (left) and PASS (right) regions in data. The gray
shaded area includes both statistical and systematic uncertainties in the background prediction
(yellow histogram) while the red and blue lines are B1 signal examples, as noted in the legends.
Lower panel as in Fig. 5.

termined primarily by the signal yield required for a 95% CL exclusion. However, the bands
retain finite width across the full MBH range.

Figure 10 summarizes results for excluded masses as a function of MD for a variety of BH mod-
 els, and as functions of the number of extra dimensions n. The excluded MminBH decreases with
increasing MD and increases with n, as expected from the corresponding behavior of the BH
production cross section in the ADD framework. Rotating BH scenarios with full evaporation

16


     CMS                 138 fb 1 (13 TeV)      CMS                 138 fb 1 (13 TeV)      102                                            102
  [fb]        B1, MD = 2 TeV, n = 2 95% CL upper limits      [fb]        B1, MD = 4 TeV, n = 2 95% CL upper limits
                N  4, S > 0.1                                 N  4, S > 0.1                                              th(BH)                                                          th(BH)
             SVM score > 0.63                               SVM score > 0.63                                     Observed                                             Observed
      101                           Expected             101                           Expected   section                                                                                     section                              68% expected                                 68% expected
                              95% expected                                 95% expected
      100                                            100  Cross                                                            Cross


     10 1                                       10 1


     10 2                                       10 2         3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12            5    6    7    8    9   10   11
                      MBH [TeV]                        MBH [TeV]

Figure 9: Expected and observed 95% CL upper limits on the cross section for a semiclassical
nonrotating BH model (B1) with n = 2 and MD = 2 TeV (left) or MD = 4 TeV (right), as a
function of MBH. The blue curves represent the theoretical cross section values. The inner
(outer) band represents the 68% (95%) quantile of the expected limit.

(B2, C1, C2) yield the strongest limits, while models with energy and momentum loss due to
graviton emission (B3) or with the remnant formation (C5, C6) give weaker exclusions due to
reduced visible final-state energy. Overall, MminBH values between approximately 9 and 11.5 TeV
are excluded at 95% CL across the considered parameter space.

     CMS                      138 fb 1 (13 TeV)      CMS                      138 fb 1 (13 TeV)     12                                             12
                                          Observed 95% CL limits                                               Observed 95% CL limits
   [TeV]                                                                    [TeV]     11                                             11
  MminBH                                                     MminBH     10                                             10

      9                                              9
                                                                                      Charybdis2     Excluded                                                                                                            Excluded           Rotating (C1)
      8                                              8       Nonrotating (C2)
             BlackMax                                                                             Rotating, evaporation model (C3)
      7        Nonrotating, no graviton emission (B1)         n = 6          7        Rotating, YR model (C4)                    n = 6
                     Rotating, no graviton emission (B2)            n = 4                           Rotating, stable remnant (C5)                n = 4
                     Rotating, energy/momentum loss (B3)          n = 2                           Rotating, boiling remnant (C6)                n = 2
      6                                              6           2       4       6       8       10            2       4       6       8       10
                       MD [TeV]                         MD [TeV]

Figure 10: Excluded MminBH values as functions of MD and n for a variety of BLACKMAX (left)
and CHARYBDIS2 (right) BH models.

Taking the B1 model with MD = 4 TeV and n = 4 as an example, the excluded BH mass value
is extended by about 1.4 TeV with respect to the previous CMS search, where 20% of the im-
provement is a result of increased integrated luminosity, 20% is because of enhanced selections
resulting in better signal-to-background discrimination, and 60% comes from updating PDFs
from MSTW2008LO to the recent NNPDF3.1 set. This dominant PDF-driven gain is expected,
as the sensitivity of the analysis is governed by events probing large parton momentum frac-

9.2  Model-dependent results                                                   17


tions, where updated PDF parameterizations lead to sizable changes in the predicted signal
yield.

An alternative interpretation of these results is obtained by establishing the maximum allowed
number of extra dimensions as a function of the fundamental Planck scale mass MD and the
minimum black hole mass MminBH for different BH models. Upper limits on the number of extra
dimensions nmax are derived as the value of n at the intersection between the experimental
limit curves and the theoretical cross sections, floored to the nearest integer. This limit is well-
defined because the theoretical cross section is a monotonically increasing function of n. When
no intersection is found within the studied range (n ∈[2, 6]), the result is reported as nmax > 6
if the experimental limit lies above all theoretical cross sections, indicating that the exclusion
does not reach n = 6, or as nmax < 2 if it lies below, indicating that the exclusion reaches
beyond n = 2.

At 95% CL, more than two extra dimensions are excluded under different assumptions of MD
and MminBH for the majority of the models considered. A systematic scan over both MD and MminBH
values is performed and the resulting parameter combinations that exclude a given number of
extra dimensions are presented in Table 1. For example, for models B1 and B2, the combinations
MD ∈(2 −8) TeV with MminBH ∈(3, 9) TeV, (2 −5) TeV with MminBH = 10 TeV, and MD = 2 TeV
with MminBH = 11 TeV all yield nmax < 2, i.e., the allowed number of extra dimensions are zero
or one. The last row shows the combinations, typically the highest MminBH with high MD, when
we cannot claim any exclusions. Combinations with MminBH < MD are unphysical and not con-
sidered. A result of nmax < 2 implies that, for the corresponding (MD, MminBH ) combination
and generator, black hole production is excluded for all values of n that are viable in the ADD
model.

The upper limits on the SB production cross sections as functions of the SB mass are set for
different MS and gS values. An example for MS = 3.5 TeV and gS = 0.2 is shown in Fig. 11
(left). The excluded masses of the SB as functions of MS at different gS values are summarized
in Fig. 11 (right).

     CMS                 138 fb 1 (13 TeV)       CMS                138 fb 1 (13 TeV)      100                                             11.5
  [fb]        String ball (Charybdis2) 95% CL upper limits                     String ball (Charybdis2)          gs = 0.2          MS = 3.5 TeV, gS = 0.2         th(SB)               [TeV]                                       gs = 0.3         N  4, S > 0.1                                  11.0                                     Observed
         SVM score > 0.63                                        SB                                      gs = 0.4                                      Expected   section                                                Mmin                              68% expected          10.5
                              95% expected
                                                      10.0  Cross          1                                                                                          Excluded     10                                                  9.5

                                                          9.0

                                                                                                Observed 95% CL limits
                                                          8.5           7    8    9    10   11   12              1        2        3        4
                       MSB [TeV]                       MS [TeV]

Figure 11: Expected and observed 95% CL upper limits for SB models with MS = 3.5 TeV and
gS = 0.2 (left) and excluded SB mass values as functions of MS at gS = 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 (right).
The inner (outer) band represents the 68% (95%) quantile of the expected limit.

18


Table 1: Parameter combinations of the fundamental Planck scale MD and minimum black hole
mass MminBH (both in TeV) that exclude a given number of extra dimensions nmax, for BH models
generated with BLACKMAX and CHARYBDIS2. Each row collects all (MD, MminBH ) pairs yielding
the same exclusion level. Combinations with MminBH < MD are unphysical and not considered.
The first row indicates the pairs that are excluded for any number of extra dimensions in the
ADD model, while the last row shows the parameters where no exclusion could be made in
this analysis.

                      (MD [TeV ], MminBH [TeV ])
             B1–B2      B3       C1       C2     C3–C6    nmax

                (2–8, 3–9)   (2–7, 3–9)                            (2–7, 3–9)
                                         (2–8, 3–9)   (2–8, 3–9)
                 (2–5, 10)    (2–4, 9)                              (2–5, 9)   <2
                                          (2–4, 10)    (2–5, 10)
                    (2, 11)       (2, 11)                                    (2, 10)

                   (6,10)      (5–6,9)     (5–6,10)      (6,10)
                                                                    (6–7,9)     2
                    (7, 10)       (2, 10)       (2, 11)       (2, 11)

                   (8,10)                                                 (8,9)
                                  (7,9)      (7–8,10)    (7–8,10)               3
                    (3, 11)                                              (3,10)

                                                          (9,10)
                   (9,10)        (8,9)        (9,10)         —       4
                                                          (3,11)

                   (4,11)       (3,10)       (3,11)    —    —       5

                             (4–9,10)                             (4–9,10)
                (5–9,11)                 (4–9,11)    (4–9,11)           >6
                             (2–9,11)                             (2–9,11)


For the sphaleron signal, a limit on the cross section can be converted into a limit on the pre-
exponential factor, defined in Section 3. Following the method in Ref. [17], we calculate the
limits on the pre-exponential factor for five scanned Esph values:  8.5, 8.75, 9, 9.25, 9.5 TeV,
under the assumptions of p(NCS) = 0, 0.5, and 1. The observed and expected 95% CL upper
limits on the pre-exponential factor as functions of Esph are shown in Fig. 12. The observed
(expected) upper limit for the nominal Esph = 9 TeV and p(NCS) = 0.5 is 0.0034 (0.0035), which
is approximately 6.2 (3.4) times more stringent than the previous best limit of 0.021 (0.012) from
CMS [21].

                                                                         19


           1 CMS                138 fb 1 (13 TeV)       CMS                138 fb 1 (13 TeV)     10                                             100
             Sphaleron, p(NCS)=0.5 95% CL upper limits                  Sphaleron   factor         N  4, S > 0.1              Observed               factor         SVM score > 0.63                                      Expected
                             68% expected        10 1
                             95% expected
     10 2
                                               10 2       Pre-exponential                                                                                                                                                                                     Pre-exponential
                                               10 3                   Observed 95% CL upper limits
                                                                                                               p(NCS) = 1
     10 3                                                                                                  p(NCS) = 0.5
                                                                                                               p(NCS) = 0
                                               10 4         8.50    8.75    9.00    9.25    9.50           8.50    8.75    9.00    9.25    9.50
                              Esph [TeV]                                Esph [TeV]

Figure 12: Expected and observed 95% CL upper limits on the pre-exponential factor for the
sphaleron model with p(NCS) = 0.5 (left), and observed limits with p(NCS) = 0, 0.5, and 1
(right). The inner (outer) band (left) represents the 68% (95%) quantiles of the expected limit.

10  Summary

A dedicated search for black holes, string balls, and sphalerons produced in proton-proton
collisions at √s = 13 TeV using data collected with the CMS detector has been presented.

No excesses above the standard model background predictions are observed. We set 95% con-
fidence level (CL) model-independent limits on cross section of hypothetical signals charac-
terized by a large multiplicity of energetic jets, leptons, and photons. The model-independent
results demonstrate approximately a factor of four improvement in the cross section limit com-
pared to the previous CMS analysis. The model-dependent results exclude at 95% CL semiclas-
sical black holes and string balls with masses below 8.4–11.4 TeV and 9.0–10.7 TeV, respectively,
depending on the model and the number of extra dimensions.  This extends the exclusion
reach by 1–1.6 TeV and 1.3–1.9 TeV, respectively. The observed (expected) upper limit on the
sphaleron pre-exponential factor for the nominal electroweak sphaleron transition energy of
9 TeV is 0.0034 (0.0035) at 95% CL, which is strengthened by a factor of 6.2 (3.4) compared to the
previous best limit of 0.021 (0.012) from CMS [21]. These are the most stringent limits on the
sphaleron pre-exponential factor to date. A significant improvement in the model-dependent
study over previous results comes from an improved understanding of parton distribution
functions. Additional significant gains can be traced to both the increased integrated lumi-
nosity, and the enhanced background rejection provided by the sphericity and phase space
distance event selection requirements.


Acknowledgments

We congratulate our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for the excellent perfor-
mance of the LHC and thank the technical and administrative staffs at CERN and at other CMS
institutes for their contributions to the success of the CMS effort. In addition, we gratefully ac-
knowledge the computing centers and personnel of the Worldwide LHC Computing Grid and
other centers for delivering so effectively the computing infrastructure essential to our analy-

20


ses. Finally, we acknowledge the enduring support for the construction and operation of the
LHC, the CMS detector, and the supporting computing infrastructure provided by the follow-
ing funding agencies: SC (Armenia), BMBWF and FWF (Austria); FNRS and FWO (Belgium);
CNPq, CAPES, FAPERJ, FAPERGS, and FAPESP (Brazil); MES and BNSF (Bulgaria); CERN;
CAS, MoST, and NSFC (China); MINCIENCIAS (Colombia); MSES and CSF (Croatia); RIF
(Cyprus); SENESCYT (Ecuador); ERC PRG and PSG, TARISTU24-TK10 and MoER TK202 (Es-
tonia); Academy of Finland, MEC, and HIP (Finland); CEA and CNRS/IN2P3 (France); SRNSF
(Georgia); BMFTR, DFG, and HGF (Germany); GSRI (Greece); MATE and NKFIH (Hungary);
DAE and DST (India); IPM (Iran); SFI (Ireland); INFN (Italy); MSIT and NRF (Republic of Ko-
rea); MES (Latvia); LMTLT (Lithuania); MOE and UM (Malaysia); BUAP, CINVESTAV, CONA-
CYT, LNS, SEP, and UASLP-FAI (Mexico); MOS (Montenegro); MBIE (New Zealand); PAEC
(Pakistan); MSHE, NSC, and NAWA (Poland); FCT (Portugal); MESTD (Serbia); MICIU/AEI
and PCTI (Spain); MOSTR (Sri Lanka); Swiss Funding Agencies (Switzerland); MST (Taipei);
MHESI (Thailand); TUBITAK and TENMAK (T¨urkiye); NASU (Ukraine); STFC (United King-
dom); DOE and NSF (USA).

Individuals have received support from the Marie-Curie program and the European Research
Council and Horizon 2020 Grant, contract Nos. 675440, 724704, 752730, 758316, 765710, 824093,
101115353, 101002207, 101001205, and COST Action CA16108 (European Union); the Leven-
tis Foundation; the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation;
the Science Committee, project no.  22rl-037 (Armenia); the Fonds pour la Formation  `a la
Recherche dans l’Industrie et dans l’Agriculture (FRIA) and Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk On-
derzoek contract No. 1228724N (Belgium); the Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Com-
mission, No.  Z191100007219010, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Univer-
sities, the Ministry of Science and Technology of China under Grant No. 2023YFA1605804,
the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.  12535004, and USTC Research
Funds of the Double First-Class Initiative No. YD2030002017 (China); the Ministry of Edu-
cation, Youth and Sports (MEYS) of the Czech Republic; the Shota Rustaveli National Science
Foundation, grant FR-22-985 (Georgia); the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), among
others, under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2121 “Quantum Universe” – 390833306,
and under project number 400140256 - GRK2497; the Hellenic Foundation for Research and
Innovation (HFRI), Project Number 2288 (Greece); the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the
New National Excellence Program - ´UNKP, the NKFIH research grants K 131991, K 138136,
K 143460, K 143477, K 147557, K 146913, K 146914, K 147048, TKP2021-NKTA-64, and 2025-
1.1.5-NEMZ KI-2025-00004, and MATE KKP and KKPCs Research Excellence and Flagship
Research Groups grants (Hungary); the Council of Science and Industrial Research, India;
ICSC – National Research Center for High Performance Computing, Big Data and Quan-
tum Computing, FAIR – Future Artificial Intelligence Research, and CUP I53D23001070006
(Mission 4 Component 1), funded by the NextGenerationEU program, the Italian Ministry
of University and Research (MUR) under Bando PRIN 2022 – CUP I53C24002390006, PRIN
PRIMULA 2022RBYK7T (Italy); the Latvian Council of Science; the Ministry of Science and
Higher Education, project no. 2022/WK/14, and the National Science Center, contracts Opus
2021/41/B/ST2/01369, 2021/43/B/ST2/01552, 2023/49/B/ST2/03273, and the NAWA con-
tract BPN/PPO/2021/1/00011 (Poland); the Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia (Por-
tugal); the National Priorities Research Program by Qatar National Research Fund; MI-
CIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, ERDF/EU, “European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR”,
projects PID2022-142604OB-C21, PID2022-139519OB-C21, PID2023-147706NB-I00, PID2023-
148896NB-I00, PID2023-146983NB-I00, PID2023-147115NB-I00, PID2023-148418NB-C41, PID2023-
148418NB-C42, PID2023-148418NB-C43, PID2023-148418NB-C44, PID2024-158190NB-C22, RYC2021-
033305-I, RYC2024-048719-I, CNS2023-144781, CNS2024-154769 and Plan de Ciencia, Tec-

References                                                                21


nolog´ıa e Innovaci´on de Asturias, Spain; the Chulalongkorn Academic into Its 2nd Century
Project Advancement Project, the National Science, Research and Innovation Fund program
IND FF 68 369 2300 097, and the Program Management Unit for Human Resources & Institu-
tional Development, Research and Innovation, grant B39G680009 (Thailand); the Eric & Wendy
Schmidt Fund for Strategic Innovation through the CERN Next Generation Triggers project
under grant agreement number SIF-2023-004; the Kavli Foundation; the Nvidia Corporation;
the SuperMicro Corporation; the Welch Foundation, contract C-1845; and the Weston Havens
Foundation (USA).


References

 [1]  I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. R. Dvali, “New dimensions at a
     millimeter to a fermi and superstrings at a TeV”, Phys. Lett. B 436 (1998) 257,
    doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00860-0, arXiv:hep-ph/9804398.

 [2] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. R. Dvali, “The hierarchy problem and new
    dimensions at a millimeter”, Phys. Lett. B 429 (1998) 263,
    doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3, arXiv:hep-ph/9803315.

 [3] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. R. Dvali, “Phenomenology, astrophysics and
    cosmology of theories with submillimeter dimensions and TeV scale quantum gravity”,
     Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 086004, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.59.086004,
    arXiv:hep-ph/9807344.

 [4] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “An alternative to compactification”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83
     (1999) 4690, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.4690, arXiv:hep-th/9906064.

 [5] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “A large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension”,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 3370, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.3370,
    arXiv:hep-ph/9905221.

 [6] S. Dimopoulos and G. L. Landsberg, “Black holes at the LHC”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001)
     161602, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.161602, arXiv:hep-ph/0106295.

 [7] P. C. Argyres, S. Dimopoulos, and J. March-Russell, “Black holes and submillimeter
    dimensions”, Phys. Lett. B 441 (1998) 96, doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)01184-8,
    arXiv:hep-th/9808138.

 [8] S. B. Giddings and S. D. Thomas, “High-energy colliders as black hole factories: The end
     of short distance physics”, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002) 056010,
    doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010, arXiv:hep-ph/0106219.

 [9] S. W. Hawking, “Particle creation by black holes”, Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975) 199,
    doi:10.1007/BF02345020. [Erratum: doi:10.1007/BF01608497].

[10] P. Meade and L. Randall, “Black holes and quantum gravity at the LHC”, JHEP 05 (2008)
     003, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2008/05/003, arXiv:0708.3017.

[11] D. M. Gingrich, “Quantum black holes with charge, colour, and spin at the LHC”,  J. Phys.
   G 37 (2010) 105008, doi:10.1088/0954-3899/37/10/105008, arXiv:0912.0826.

[12] X. Calmet, W. Gong, and S. D. H. Hsu, “Colorful quantum black holes at the LHC”, Phys.
      Lett. B 668 (2008) 20, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2008.08.011, arXiv:0806.4605.

22


[13] S. Dimopoulos and R. Emparan, “String balls at the LHC and beyond”, Phys. Lett. B 526
     (2002) 393, doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(01)01525-8, arXiv:hep-ph/0108060.

[14] G. ’t Hooft, “Symmetry breaking through Bell-Jackiw anomalies”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37
     (1976) 8, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.37.8.

[15] F. R. Klinkhamer and N. S. Manton, “A saddle point solution in the Weinberg-Salam
     theory”, Phys. Rev. D 30 (1984) 2212, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.30.2212.

[16] S. H. H. Tye and S. S. C. Wong, “Bloch wave function for the periodic sphaleron potential
    and unsuppressed baryon and lepton number violating processes”, Phys. Rev. D 92
     (2015) 045005, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.92.045005, arXiv:1505.03690.

[17]  J. Ellis and K. Sakurai, “Search for sphalerons in proton-proton collisions”, JHEP 04
     (2016) 086, doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2016)086, arXiv:1601.03654.

[18] A. Papaefstathiou, S. Pl¨atzer, and K. Sakurai, “On the phenomenology of
    sphaleron-induced processes at the LHC and beyond”, JHEP 12 (2019) 017,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2019)017, arXiv:1910.04761.

[19] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for strong gravity in multijet final states produced in pp
     collisions at √s = 13 TeV using the ATLAS detector at the LHC”, JHEP 03 (2016) 026,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2016)026, arXiv:1512.02586.

[20] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for quantum black hole production in lepton+jet final
     states using proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, Phys.
     Rev. D 109 (2024) 032010, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.109.032010,
    arXiv:2307.14967.

[21] CMS Collaboration, “Search for black holes and sphalerons in high-multiplicity final
     states in proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV”, JHEP 11 (2018) 042,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2018)042, arXiv:1805.06013.

[22] CMS Collaboration, “Search for microscopic black hole signatures at the Large Hadron
     Collider”, Phys. Lett. B 697 (2011) 434, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2011.02.032,
    arXiv:1012.3375.
[23] CMS Collaboration, “Search for microscopic black holes in pp collisions at √s = 7 TeV”,
    JHEP 04 (2012) 061, doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2012)061, arXiv:1202.6396.
[24] CMS Collaboration, “Search for microscopic black holes in pp collisions at √s = 8 TeV”,
    JHEP 07 (2013) 178, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2013)178, arXiv:1303.5338.

[25] CMS Collaboration, “Search for black holes in high-multiplicity final states in
    proton-proton collisions at √s =13 TeV”, Phys. Lett. B 774 (2017) 279,
    doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2017.09.053, arXiv:1705.01403.

[26] HEPData record for this analysis, 2025. doi:10.17182/hepdata.165871.

[27] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC”, JINST 3 (2008) S08004,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08004, arXiv:1003.4038.

[28] CMS Collaboration, “Development of the CMS detector for the CERN LHC Run 3”,
    JINST 19 (2024) P05064, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/19/05/P05064,
    arXiv:2309.05466.

References                                                                23


[29] CMS Collaboration, “Description and performance of track and primary-vertex
     reconstruction with the CMS tracker”, JINST 9 (2014) P10009,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/9/10/P10009, arXiv:1405.6569.

[30] Tracker Group of the CMS Collaboration, “The CMS phase-1 pixel detector upgrade”,
    JINST 16 (2021) P02027, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/02/P02027,
    arXiv:2012.14304.

[31] CMS Collaboration, “Track impact parameter resolution for the full pseudo rapidity
    coverage in the 2017 dataset with the CMS Phase-1 pixel detector”, CMS Detector
    Performance Summary CMS-DP-2020-049, 2020.

[32] CMS Collaboration, “2017 tracking performance plots”, CMS Detector Performance
   Summary CMS-DP-2017-015, 2017.

[33] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of the CMS level-1 trigger in proton-proton collisions
     at √s = 13 TeV”, JINST 15 (2020) P10017,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/10/P10017, arXiv:2006.10165.

[34] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS trigger system”, JINST 12 (2017) P01020,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/01/P01020, arXiv:1609.02366.

[35] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of the CMS high-level trigger during LHC Run 2”,
    JINST 19 (2024) P11021, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/19/11/P11021,
    arXiv:2410.17038.

[36] D.-C. Dai et al., “BlackMax: A black-hole event generator with rotation, recoil, split
     branes, and brane tension”, Phys. Rev. D 77 (2008) 076007,
    doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.77.076007, arXiv:0711.3012.

[37] C. M. Harris, P. Richardson, and B. R. Webber, “CHARYBDIS: A black hole event
     generator”, JHEP 08 (2003) 033, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2003/08/033,
    arXiv:hep-ph/0307305.

[38]  J. A. Frost et al., “Phenomenology of production and decay of spinning
     extra-dimensional black holes at hadron colliders”, JHEP 10 (2009) 014,
    doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/10/014, arXiv:0904.0979.

[39] C. Bravo and J. Hauser, “BaryoGEN, a Monte Carlo generator for sphaleron-like
     transitions in proton-proton collisions”, JHEP 11 (2018) 041,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2018)041, arXiv:1805.02786.

[40] R. Frederix et al., “The automation of next-to-leading order electroweak calculations”,
    JHEP 07 (2018) 185, doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2018)07, arXiv:1804.10017.
     [Erratum: doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2021)085].

[41]  J. Alwall et al., “Comparative study of various algorithms for the merging of parton
    showers and matrix elements in hadronic collisions”, Eur. Phys. J. C 53 (2008) 473,
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-007-0490-5, arXiv:0706.2569.

[42] S. Creek, O. Efthimiou, P. Kanti, and K. Tamvakis, “Greybody factors for brane scalar
     fields in a rotating black-hole background”, Phys. Rev. D 75 (2007) 084043,
    doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.75.084043, arXiv:hep-th/0701288.

24


[43] S. Creek, O. Efthimiou, P. Kanti, and K. Tamvakis, “Scalar emission in the bulk in a
     rotating black hole background”, Phys. Lett. B 656 (2007) 102,
    doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2007.09.050, arXiv:0709.0241.

[44] H. Yoshino and V. S. Rychkov, “Improved analysis of black hole formation in high-energy
     particle collisions”, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 104028,
    doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.71.104028, arXiv:hep-th/0503171. [Erratum:
    doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.77.089905].

[45] B. Koch, M. Bleicher, and S. Hossenfelder, “Black hole remnants at the LHC”, JHEP 10
     (2005) 053, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/053, arXiv:hep-ph/0507138.

[46] H. Stoecker, “Stable TeV - black hole remnants at the LHC: Discovery through di-jet
     suppression, mono-jet emission and a supersonic boom in the quark-gluon plasma”, Int.
       J. Mod. Phys. D 16 (2007) 185, doi:10.1142/S0218271807009930,
    arXiv:hep-ph/0605062.

[47] F. Scardigli, “Glimpses on the micro black hole Planck phase”, Symmetry 12 (2020) 1519,
    doi:10.3390/sym12091519, arXiv:0809.1832.

[48] D. M. Gingrich and K. Martell, “Study of highly-excited string states at the Large Hadron
     Collider”, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 115009, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.115009,
    arXiv:0808.2512.

[49] CMS Collaboration, “Extraction and validation of a new set of CMS PYTHIA8 tunes from
    underlying-event measurements”, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 4,
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-7499-4, arXiv:1903.12179.

[50] NNPDF Collaboration, “Parton distributions from high-precision collider data”, Eur.
     Phys. J. C 77 (2017) 663, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-5199-5,
    arXiv:1706.00428.

[51] CMS Collaboration, “Upgrades for the CMS simulation”,  J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 608 (2015)
     012056, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/608/1/012056.

[52] CMS Collaboration, “Particle-flow reconstruction and global event description with the
   CMS detector”, JINST 12 (2017) P10003, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/10/P10003,
    arXiv:1706.04965.

[53] CMS Collaboration, “Technical proposal for the Phase-II upgrade of the Compact Muon
     Solenoid”, CMS Technical Proposal CERN-LHCC-2015-010, CMS-TDR-15-02, CMS, 2015.

[54] CMS Collaboration, “Jet energy scale and resolution in the CMS experiment in pp
     collisions at 8 TeV”, JINST 12 (2017), no. 02, P02014,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/02/P02014, arXiv:1607.03663.

[55] CMS Collaboration, “Pileup removal algorithms”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary
    CMS-PAS-JME-14-001, CMS, 2014.

[56] CMS Collaboration, “Jet algorithms performance in 13 TeV data”, CMS Physics Analysis
   Summary CMS-PAS-JME-16-003, CMS, 2017.

[57] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of electron reconstruction and selection with the CMS
     detector in proton-proton collisions at √s = 8 TeV”, JINST 10 (2015) P06005,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/10/06/P06005, arXiv:1502.02701.

References                                                                25


[58] CMS Collaboration, “Electron and photon reconstruction and identification with the
   CMS experiment at the CERN LHC”, JINST 16 (2021) P05014,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/05/P05014, arXiv:2012.06888.

[59] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of CMS muon reconstruction in pp collision events at
   √s = 7 TeV”, JINST 7 (2012) P10002, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/7/10/P10002,
    arXiv:1206.4071.

[60] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of the CMS muon detector and muon reconstruction
    with proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV”, JINST 13 (2018) P06015,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/13/06/P06015, arXiv:1804.04528.

[61] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of missing transverse momentum reconstruction in
    proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV using the CMS detector”, JINST 14 (2019)
     P07004, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/14/07/P07004, arXiv:1903.06078.

[62] ALEPH Collaboration, “Studies of quantum chromodynamics with the ALEPH
     detector”, Phys. Rept. 294 (1998) 1, doi:10.1016/S0370-1573(97)00045-8.

[63] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of event shapes at large momentum transfer with
     the ATLAS detector in pp collisions at √s = 7 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012) 2211,
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-2211-y, arXiv:1206.2135.

[64] ALICE Collaboration, “Transverse sphericity of primary charged particles in minimum
     bias proton-proton collisions at √s = 0.9, 2.76 and 7 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012) 2124,
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-2124-9, arXiv:1205.3963.

[65] P. T. Komiske, E. M. Metodiev, and J. Thaler, “Metric space of collider events”, Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 123 (2019) 041801, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.041801,
    arXiv:1902.02346.

[66] P. T. Komiske, E. M. Metodiev, and J. Thaler, “The hidden geometry of particle collisions”,
    JHEP 07 (2020) 006, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2020)006, arXiv:2004.04159.

[67] T. Cai, J. Cheng, K. Craig, and N. Craig, “Which metric on the space of collider events?”,
     Phys. Rev. D 105 (2022) 076003, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.105.076003,
    arXiv:2111.03670.

[68] P. T. Komiske et al., “Exploring the space of jets with CMS open data”, Phys. Rev. D 101
     (2020) 034009, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.101.034009, arXiv:1908.08542.

[69] C. Cesarotti and J. Thaler, “A robust measure of event isotropy at colliders”, JHEP 08
     (2020) 084, doi:10.1007/JHEP08(2020)084, arXiv:2004.06125.

[70] C. Cesarotti, M. Reece, and M. J. Strassler, “The efficacy of event isotropy as an event
    shape observable”, JHEP 07 (2021) 215, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2021)215,
    arXiv:2011.06599.

[71] L. Gouskos et al., “Optimal transport for a novel event description at hadron colliders”,
     Phys. Rev. D 108 (2023) 096003, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108.096003,
    arXiv:2211.02029.

[72] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurements of multijet event isotropies using optimal
     transport with the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 10 (2023) 060,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2023)060, arXiv:2305.16930.

26


[73] A. J. Larkoski and T. Melia, “Covariantizing phase space”, Phys. Rev. D 102 (2020)
     094014, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.102.094014, arXiv:2008.06508.

[74] T. Cai et al., “The phase space distance between collider events”, JHEP 09 (2024) 054,
    doi:10.1007/JHEP09(2024)054, arXiv:2405.16698.

[75] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks”, Mach. Learn. 20 (1995) 273,
    doi:10.1007/BF00994018.

[76] G. Punzi, “Sensitivity of searches for new signals and its optimization”, eConf 030908
     (2003) MODT002, doi:10.48550/arXiv.physics/0308063,
    arXiv:physics/0308063.

[77] L. Corcodilos, “The 2D Alphabet background modeling method and its use in the search
     for an excited bottom quark”. PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, 2021.

[78] R. A. Fisher, “On the interpretation of χ2 from contingency tables, and the calculation of
     p”,  J. Roy. Stat. Soc. 85 (1922) 87, doi:10.2307/2340521.

[79] S. Baker and R. D. Cousins, “Clarification of the use of chi-square and likelihood
     functions in fits to histograms”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 221 (1984) 437,
    doi:10.1016/0167-5087(84)90016-4.

[80] CMS Collaboration, “Precision luminosity measurement in proton-proton collisions at
   √s = 13 TeV with the CMS detector”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary
    CMS-PAS-LUM-20-001, CMS, 2025.
[81] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the inelastic proton-proton cross section at √s = 13
    TeV”, JHEP 07 (2018) 161, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2018)161, arXiv:1802.02613.

[82] CMS Collaboration, “Identification of heavy, energetic, hadronically decaying particles
    using machine-learning techniques”, JINST 15 (2020) P06005,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/06/P06005, arXiv:2004.08262.

[83] CMS Collaboration, “Pileup mitigation at CMS in 13 TeV data”, JINST 15 (2020) P09018,
    doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/09/P09018, arXiv:2003.00503.

[84] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS statistical analysis and combination tool: Combine”,
    Comput. Softw. Big Sci. 8 (2024) 19, doi:10.1007/s41781-024-00121-4,
    arXiv:2404.06614.

[85] W. Verkerke and D. Kirkby, “The ROOFIT toolkit for data modeling”, in Proc. 13th Int.
     Conf. on Computing in High Energy and Nuclear Physics (CHEP 2003): La Jolla CA, United
      States, March 24–28, 2003. 2003. arXiv:physics/0306116.

[86] L. Moneta et al., “The ROOSTATS project”, in Proc. 13th Int. Workshop on Advanced
    Computing and Analysis Techniques in Physics Research (ACAT 2010): Jaipur, India, February
     22–27, 2010. 2010. arXiv:1009.1003. doi:10.22323/1.093.0057.

[87] T. Junk, “Confidence level computation for combining searches with small statistics”,
     Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 434 (1999) 435, doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(99)00498-2,
    arXiv:hep-ex/9902006.

[88] A. L. Read, “Presentation of search results: The CLs technique”,  J. Phys. G 28 (2002) 2693,
    doi:10.1088/0954-3899/28/10/313.

References                                                                27


[89] ATLAS, CMS, LHC Higgs Combination Group Collaboration, “Procedure for the LHC
    Higgs boson search combination in Summer 2011”, Technical Report
    CMS-NOTE-2011-005, ATL-PHYS-PUB-2011-11, CERN, 2011.

[90] G. Cowan, K. Cranmer, E. Gross, and O. Vitells, “Asymptotic formulae for
     likelihood-based tests of new physics”, Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1554,
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1554-0, arXiv:1007.1727. [Erratum:
    doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2501-z].

28

                                                                         29

A  The CMS Collaboration

Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
A. Hayrapetyan, V. Makarenko    , A. Tumasyan1

Institut f¨ur Hochenergiephysik, Vienna, Austria
W. Adam    , L. Benato    , T. Bergauer    , M. Dragicevic    , P.S. Hussain    , M. Jeitler2     ,
N. Krammer    , A. Li    , D. Liko    , M. Matthewman,  J. Schieck2     , R. Sch¨ofbeck2     ,
M. Shooshtari    , M. Sonawane    , W. Waltenberger    , C.-E. Wulz2

Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium
T. Janssen    , H. Kwon    , D. Ocampo Henao    , T. Van Laer    , P. Van Mechelen

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
J. Bierkens    , N. Breugelmans, J. D’Hondt    , S. Dansana    , A. De Moor    , M. Delcourt    ,
C. Gupta, F. Heyen, Y. Hong    , P. Kashko    , S. Lowette    , I. Makarenko    , S. Tavernier    ,
M. Tytgat3     , G.P. Van Onsem    , S. Van Putte    , D. Vannerom

Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium
B. Bilin    , B. Clerbaux    , A.K. Das,  I. De Bruyn    , G. De Lentdecker    , H. Evard    ,
L. Favart    ,  P. Gianneios    , A. Khalilzadeh, A. Malara    , M.A. Shahzad, A. Sharma    ,
L. Thomas    , M. Vanden Bemden    , C. Vander Velde    , P. Vanlaer    , F. Zhang

Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
M. De Coen    , D. Dobur    , C. Giordano    , G. Gokbulut    , K. Kaspar    , D. Kavtaradze,
D. Marckx    , K. Skovpen    , A.M. Tomaru, N. Van Den Bossche    ,  J. van der Linden    ,
J. Vandenbroeck

Universit´e Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
H. Aarup Petersen    , S. Bein    , A. Benecke    , A. Bethani    , G. Bruno    , A. Cappati    ,
J. De Favereau De Jeneret    , C. Delaere    ,  F. Gameiro Casalinho    , A. Giammanco    ,
A.O. Guzel    , V. Lemaitre, J. Lidrych    , P. Malek    , S. Turkcapar

Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
G.A. Alves    , M. Barroso Ferreira Filho    , E. Coelho    , C. Hensel    , D. Matos Figueiredo    ,
T.  Menezes De  Oliveira    ,  C. Mora  Herrera    ,   P.  Rebello  Teles    ,  M.  Soeiro    ,
E.J. Tonelli Manganote4     , A. Vilela Pereira

Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
W.L.  Ald´a  J´unior    ,  H.  Brandao  Malbouisson    ,  W.  Carvalho    ,   J.  Chinellato5     ,
M. Costa Reis    , E.M. Da Costa    , G.G. Da Silveira6     , D. De Jesus Damiao    , S. Fon-
seca De Souza    , R. Gomes De Souza    , S. S. Jesus    , T. Laux Kuhn6     , K. Mota Amarilo    ,
L. Mundim    , H. Nogima    ,  J.P. Pinheiro    , A. Santoro    , A. Sznajder    , M. Thiel    ,
F. Torres Da Silva De Araujo7

Universidade Estadual Paulista, Universidade Federal do ABC, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
C.A. Bernardes    , L. Calligaris    , F. Damas    , T.R. Fernandez Perez Tomei    , E.M. Gre-
gores    , B. Lopes Da Costa    ,  I. Maietto Silverio    , P.G. Mercadante    ,  S.F. Novaes    ,
Sandra S. Padula    , V. Scheurer

Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia,
Bulgaria
A. Aleksandrov    , G. Antchev    , P. Danev, R. Hadjiiska    , P. Iaydjiev    , M. Shopova    ,
G. Sultanov

30


University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria
A. Dimitrov    , L. Litov    , B. Pavlov    , P. Petkov    , A. Petrov

Instituto De Alta Investigaci´on, Universidad de Tarapac´a, Casilla 7 D, Arica, Chile
S. Keshri    , D. Laroze    , M. Meena    , S. Thakur

Universidad Tecnica Federico Santa Maria, Valparaiso, Chile
W. Brooks

Beihang University, Beijing, China
T. Cheng    , T. Javaid    , L. Wang    , L. Yuan

Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Z. Hu    , Z. Liang, J. Liu, X. Wang    , H. Yang

Institute of High Energy Physics, Beijing, China
G.M. Chen8     , H.S. Chen8     , M. Chen8     , Y. Chen    , Q. Hou    , X. Hou,  F. Iemmi    ,
C.H. Jiang, H. Liao    , G. Liu    , Z.-A. Liu9     , J.N. Song9, S. Song    ,  J. Tao    , C. Wang8,
J. Wang    , H. Zhang    , J. Zhao

State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
A. Agapitos    , Y. Ban    , A. Carvalho Antunes De Oliveira    , S. Deng    , B. Guo, Q. Guo,
C. Jiang    , A. Levin    , C. Li    , Q. Li    , Y. Mao, S. Qian, S.J. Qian    , X. Qin, C. Quaranta    ,
X. Sun    , D. Wang    , J. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou

State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Institute of Quantum Matter,
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
S. Yang

Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
Z. You

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
N. Lu

Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
G. Bauer10,11, Z. Cui11, B. Li12, H. Wang    , K. Yi13     , J. Zhang

Institute of Frontier and Interdisciplinary Science, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
C. Li

Institute of Modern Physics and Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Ion-beam
Application (MOE) - Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Y. Li, Y. Zhou14

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Z. Lin    , C. Lu    , M. Xiao15

Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota, Colombia
C. Avila    , D.A. Barbosa Trujillo    , A. Cabrera    , C. Florez    , J. Fraga    , J.A. Reyes Vega

Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia
C. Rend´on    , M. Rodriguez    , A.A. Ruales Barbosa    , J.D. Ruiz Alvarez

University of Split, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Naval
Architecture, Split, Croatia
N. Godinovic    , D. Lelas    , A. Sculac

                                                                         31


University of Split, Faculty of Science, Split, Croatia
M. Kovac    , A. Petkovic    , T. Sculac

Institute Rudjer Boskovic, Zagreb, Croatia
P. Bargassa    , V. Brigljevic    , B.K. Chitroda    , D. Ferencek    , K. Jakovcic, A. Starodumov    ,
T. Susa

University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
A.  Attikis    ,  K.  Christoforou    ,  S.  Konstantinou    ,  C. Leonidou    ,  L.  Paizanos    ,
F. Ptochos    , P.A. Razis    , H. Rykaczewski, H. Saka    , A. Stepennov

Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
M. Finger†     , M. Finger Jr.

Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
E. Carrera Jarrin

Academy of Scientific Research and Technology of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Egyptian
Network of High Energy Physics, Cairo, Egypt
A.A. Abdelalim16,17     , B. El-mahdy18

Center for High Energy Physics (CHEP-FU), Fayoum University, El-Fayoum, Egypt
A. Hussein    , H. Mohammed

National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia
K. Jaffel    , M. Kadastik, T. Lange    , C. Nielsen    , J. Pata    , M. Raidal    , N. Seeba    , L. Tani

Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
E. Br¨ucken    , A. Milieva    , K. Osterberg    , M. Voutilainen

Helsinki Institute of Physics, Helsinki, Finland
F. Garcia    , P. Inkaew    , K.T.S. Kallonen    , R. Kumar Verma    , T. Lamp´en    , K. Lassila-
Perini    , B. Lehtela    , S. Lehti    , T. Lind´en    , N.R. Mancilla Xinto    , M. Myllym¨aki    ,
M.m. Rantanen    , S. Saariokari    , N.T. Toikka    , J. Tuominiemi

Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Lappeenranta, Finland
N. Bin Norjoharuddeen    , H. Kirschenmann    , P. Luukka    , H. Petrow

IRFU, CEA, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
M. Besancon    , F. Couderc    , M. Dejardin    , D. Denegri, P. Devouge, J.L. Faure    , F. Ferri    ,
P. Gaigne, S. Ganjour    , P. Gras    , F. Guilloux    , G. Hamel de Monchenault    , M. Kumar    ,
V. Lohezic    ,  Y. Maidannyk    ,  J. Malcles    ,  F. Orlandi    ,  L. Portales    ,  S. Ronchi    ,
M.¨O. Sahin    , P. Simkina    , M. Titov    , M. Tornago

Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet, CNRS/IN2P3, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, Palaiseau, France
R. Amella Ranz    , F. Beaudette    , G. Boldrini    , P. Busson    , C. Charlot    , M. Chiusi    ,
T.D. Cuisset    , O. Davignon    , A. De Wit    ,  T. Debnath    ,  I.T. Ehle    ,  S. Ghosh    ,
A. Gilbert    , R. Granier de Cassagnac    , L. Kalipoliti    , M. Manoni    , M. Nguyen    ,
S. Obraztsov    , C. Ochando    , R. Salerno    , J.B. Sauvan    , Y. Sirois    , G. Sokmen, Y. Song    ,
L. Urda G´omez    , A. Zabi    , A. Zghiche

Universit´e de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France
J.-L. Agram19     ,  J. Andrea    , D. Bloch    , J.-M. Brom    , E.C. Chabert    , C. Collard    ,
G. Coulon, S. Falke    , U. Goerlach    , R. Haeberle    , A.-C. Le Bihan    , G. Saha    , A. Savoy-
Navarro20     , P. Vaucelle

32


Centre de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucleaire et de Physique des Particules,
CNRS/IN2P3, Villeurbanne, France
A. Di Florio    , B. Orzari

Institut de Physique des 2 Infinis de Lyon (IP2I ), Villeurbanne, France
D. Amram, S. Beauceron    , B. Blancon    , G. Boudoul    , N. Chanon    , D. Contardo    ,
P. Depasse    , H. El Mamouni,  J. Fay    , E. Fillaudeau    , S. Gascon    , M. Gouzevitch    ,
C. Greenberg    , G. Grenier    , B. Ille    , E. Jourd’Huy, M. Lethuillier    , B. Massoteau    ,
L. Mirabito, A. Purohit    , M. Vander Donckt    , C. Verollet

Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
A. Khvedelidze21     , I. Lomidze    , Z. Tsamalaidze21

RWTH Aachen University, I. Physikalisches Institut, Aachen, Germany
V. Botta    , S. Consuegra Rodr´ıguez    , L. Feld    , K. Klein    , M. Lipinski    , P. Nattland    ,
V. Oppenl¨ander, A. Pauls    , D. P´erez Ad´an    , N. R¨owert

RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
C. Daumann,  S. Diekmann    , N. Eich    , D. Eliseev    ,  F. Engelke    ,   J. Erdmann    ,
M. Erdmann    , B. Fischer    ,  T. Hebbeker    , K. Hoepfner    , A. Jung    , N. Kumar    ,
M.y. Lee    , F. Mausolf    , M. Merschmeyer    , A. Meyer    , A. Pozdnyakov    , W. Redjeb    ,
H. Reithler    , U. Sarkar    , V. Sarkisovi    , A. Schmidt    , C. Seth, A. Sharma    , J.L. Spah    ,
V. Vaulin, S. Zaleski

RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut B, Aachen, Germany
M.R. Beckers    , C. Dziwok    , G. Fl¨ugge    , N. Hoeflich    ,  T. Kress    , A. Nowack    ,
O. Pooth    , A. Stahl    , A. Zotz

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
A.  Abel,  M. Aldaya  Martin    ,   J. Alimena    ,  Y. An    ,   I. Andreev    ,   J. Bach    ,
S. Baxter    ,  H.  Becerril Gonzalez    ,  O. Behnke    ,  A. Belvedere    ,  F. Blekman22     ,
K. Borras23     , A. Campbell    , S. Chatterjee    , L.X. Coll Saravia    , G. Eckerlin, D. Eckstein    ,
E. Gallo22     , A. Geiser    , M. Guthoff    , A. Hinzmann    , L. Jeppe    , M. Kasemann    ,
C. Kleinwort    , R. Kogler    , M. Komm    , D. Kr¨ucker    , W. Lange, D. Leyva Pernia    ,
K.-Y. Lin    , K. Lipka24     , W. Lohmann25     ,  J. Malvaso    , R. Mankel    ,  I.-A. Melzer-
Pellmann    , M. Mendizabal Morentin    , A.B. Meyer    , G. Milella    , K. Moral Figueroa    ,
A. Mussgiller    ,  L.P. Nair    ,  J. Niedziela    , A. N¨urnberg    ,  J. Park    ,  E. Ranken    ,
A.  Raspereza    ,  D.  Rastorguev    ,  L. Rygaard    ,  M.  Scham26,23     ,  S.  Schnake23     ,
P.  Sch¨utze    ,  C. Schwanenberger22     ,  D. Schwarz    ,  D. Selivanova    ,  K. Sharko    ,
M. Shchedrolosiev    ,  D.  Stafford    , M.  Torkian,  A. Ventura Barroso    ,  R. Walsh    ,
D. Wang    , Q. Wang    , K. Wichmann, L. Wiens23     , C. Wissing    , Y. Yang    , S. Zakharov    ,
A. Zimermmane Castro Santos

University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
A.R.  Alves Andrade    ,  M.  Antonello    ,  S.  Bollweg,  M. Bonanomi    ,  L.  Ebeling,
K. El Morabit    , Y. Fischer    , M. Frahm    , E. Garutti    , A. Grohsjean    , A.A. Guvenli    ,
J. Haller    , D. Hundhausen, G. Kasieczka    ,  P. Keicher    , R. Klanner    , W. Korcari    ,
T. Kramer    , C.c. Kuo, F. Labe    , J. Lange    , A. Lobanov    , J. Matthiesen, L. Moureaux    ,
K. Nikolopoulos    , A. Paasch    , K.J. Pena Rodriguez    , N. Prouvost, B. Raciti    , M. Rieger    ,
D. Savoiu    , P. Schleper    , M. Schr¨oder    , J. Schwandt    , M. Sommerhalder    , H. Stadie    ,
G. Steinbr¨uck    , R. Ward    , B. Wiederspan, M. Wolf    , C. Yede

Karlsruher Institut fuer Technologie, Karlsruhe, Germany

                                                                         33


A. Brusamolino    , E. Butz    , Y.M. Chen    , T. Chwalek    , A. Dierlamm    , G.G. Dincer    ,
D. Druzhkin    , U. Elicabuk, N. Faltermann    , M. Giffels    , A. Gottmann    , F. Hartmann27     ,
M. Horzela    ,  F. Hummer    , U. Husemann    ,  J. Kieseler    , M. Klute    ,  J. Knolle    ,
R. Kunnilan Muhammed Rafeek, O. Lavoryk    , J.M. Lawhorn    , S. Maier    , M. Molch,
A.A. Monsch    , M. Mormile    , Th. M¨uller    , E. Pfeffer    , M. Presilla    , G. Quast    ,
K. Rabbertz    , B. Regnery    , R. Schmieder, N. Shadskiy    , I. Shvetsov    , H.J. Simonis    ,
L. Sowa    , L. Stockmeier, K. Tauqeer, M. Toms    , B. Topko    , N. Trevisani    , C. Verstege    ,
T. Voigtl¨ander    , R.F. Von Cube    , J. Von Den Driesch, C. Winter, R. Wolf    , W.D. Zeuner    ,
X. Zuo

Institute of Nuclear and Particle Physics (INPP), NCSR Demokritos, Aghia Paraskevi,
Greece
G. Anagnostou    , G. Daskalakis    , A. Kyriakis

National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
G.  Melachroinos,  Z.  Painesis    ,   I.  Paraskevas    ,  N.  Saoulidou    ,  K.  Theofilatos    ,
E. Tziaferi    , E. Tzovara    , K. Vellidis    , I. Zisopoulos

National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
T. Chatzistavrou    , G. Karapostoli    , K. Kousouris    , E. Siamarkou, G. Tsipolitis

University of Io´annina, Io´annina, Greece
I. Evangelou    ,  C. Foudas,  P. Katsoulis,  P. Kokkas    ,  P.G. Kosmoglou Kioseoglou    ,
N. Manthos    , I. Papadopoulos    , J. Strologas

HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
C. Hajdu    , D. Horvath28,29     , ´A. Kadlecsik    , C. Lee    , K. M´arton, A.J. R´adl30     , F. Sikler    ,
V. Veszpremi

MTA-ELTE Lend¨ulet CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University,
Budapest, Hungary
M. Csan´ad    , K. Farkas    , A. Feh´erkuti31     , M.M.A. Gadallah32     , M. Le´on Coello    ,
G. P´asztor    , G.I. Veres

Faculty of Informatics, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
B. Ujvari    , G. Zilizi

HUN-REN ATOMKI - Institute of Nuclear Research, Debrecen, Hungary
G. Bencze, S. Czellar, J. Molnar, Z. Szillasi

Karoly Robert Campus, MATE Institute of Technology, Gyongyos, Hungary
T. Csorgo31     , F. Nemes31     , T. Novak    , I. Szanyi33

IIT Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India
S. Bahinipati    , R. Raturi

Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
S. Bansal    , S.B. Beri, V. Bhatnagar    , S. Chauhan    , N. Dhingra34     , A. Kaur    , H. Kaur    ,
M. Kaur    , S. Kumar    , T. Sheokand, J.B. Singh    , A. Singla

University of Delhi, Delhi, India
A. Bhardwaj    , A. Chhetri    , B.C. Choudhary    , A. Kumar    , A. Kumar    , M. Naimuddin    ,
S. Phor    , K. Ranjan    , M.K. Saini

Indian Institute of Technology Mandi (IIT-Mandi), Himachal Pradesh, India
P. Palni

34


University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
S. Acharya35     , B. Gomber

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India
S. Mukherjee

Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, HBNI, Kolkata, India
S. Bhattacharya    , S. Das Gupta, S. Dutta    , S. Dutta, S. Sarkar

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Madras, India
M.M. Ameen    ,  P.K. Behera    ,  S. Chatterjee    , G. Dash    , A. Dattamunsi,  P. Jana    ,
P. Kalbhor    , S. Kamble    , J.R. Komaragiri36     , T. Mishra    , P.R. Pujahari    , A.K. Sikdar    ,
R.K. Singh    , P. Verma    , S. Verma    , A. Vijay

IISER Mohali, India, Mohali, India
B.K. Sirasva

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-A, Mumbai, India
L. Bhatt, S. Dugad    , G.B. Mohanty    , M. Shelake    , P. Suryadevara

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-B, Mumbai, India
A. Bala    , S. Banerjee    , S. Barman37     , R.M. Chatterjee, M. Guchait    , Sh. Jain    , A. Jaiswal,
S. Kumar    , M. Maity37, G. Majumder    , K. Mazumdar    ,  S. Parolia    , R. Saxena    ,
A. Thachayath

National Institute of Science Education and Research, An OCC of Homi Bhabha National
Institute, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
D. Maity38     , P. Mal    , K. Naskar38     , A. Nayak38     , K. Pal    , P. Sadangi, S.K. Swain    ,
S. Varghese38     , D. Vats38

Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune, India
S. Dube    , P. Hazarika    , B. Kansal    , A. Laha    , R. Sharma    , S. Sharma    , K.Y. Vaish

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Telangana, India
S. Ghosh

Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
H. Bakhshiansohi39     , A. Jafari40     , V. Sedighzadeh Dalavi    , M. Zeinali41

Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
S. Bashiri    , S. Chenarani42     , S.M. Etesami    , Y. Hosseini    , M. Khakzad    , E. Khazaie    ,
M. Mohammadi Najafabadi    , S. Tizchang43

University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
M. Felcini    , M. Grunewald

INFN Sezione di Baria, Universit`a di Barib, Politecnico di Baric, Bari, Italy
M. Abbresciaa,b     , M. Barbieria,b, M. Buonsantea,b     , A. Colaleoa,b     , D. Creanzaa,c     ,
N. De Filippisa,c     , M. De Palmaa,b     , W. Elmetenaweea,b,16     , N. Ferraraa,c     , L. Fiorea     ,
L. Generosoa,b, L. Longoa     , M. Loukaa,b     , G. Maggia,c     , M. Maggia     , I. Margjekaa     ,
V. Mastrapasquaa,b     ,  S. Mya,b     ,  F. Nennaa,b     ,  S. Nuzzoa,b     ,  A.  Pellecchiaa,b     ,
A.  Pompilia,b     ,  G.  Pugliesea,c     ,  R.  Radognaa,b     ,  D. Ramosa     ,  A.  Ranieria     ,
L.  Silvestrisa     ,  F.M. Simonea,c     ,  ¨U.  S¨ozbilira     ,  A. Stamerraa,b     ,  D.  Troianoa,b     ,
R. Vendittia,b     , P. Verwilligena     , A. Zazaa,b

INFN Sezione di Bolognaa, Universit`a di Bolognab, Bologna, Italy

                                                                         35


G. Abbiendia     , D. Bonacorsia,b     ,  P. Capiluppia,b     , F.R. Cavalloa     , M. Cuffiania,b     ,
G.M. Dallavallea     ,  T.  Diotalevia,b     ,  F. Fabbria     ,  A. Fanfania,b     ,  D. Fasanellaa     ,
P. Giacomellia     ,  C. Grandia     ,  L. Guiduccia,b     ,  S. Lo Meoa,44     , M. Lorussoa,b     ,
L.  Lunertia     ,   S.  Marcellinia     ,  G.  Masettia     ,   F.L.  Navarriaa,b     ,  G.  Paggia,b     ,
A. Perrottaa     , A.M. Rossia,b     , S. Rossi Tisbenia,b     , T. Rovellia,b     , G.P. Sirolia,b

INFN Sezione di Cataniaa, Universit`a di Cataniab, Catania, Italy
S. Costaa,b,45     , A. Di Mattiaa     , A. Lapertosaa     , R. Potenzaa,b, A. Tricomia,b,45

INFN Sezione di Firenzea, Universit`a di Firenzeb, Firenze, Italy
J.  Altorka,b     ,   P.  Assiourasa     ,  G.  Barbaglia     ,  G.  Bardellia     ,  M.  Bartolinia,b     ,
A.  Calandria,b     ,  B.  Camaiania,b     ,  A.  Cassesea     ,  R.  Ceccarellia     ,  V.  Ciullia,b     ,
C.  Civininia     ,  R.  D’Alessandroa,b     ,  L.  Damentia,b,  E.  Focardia,b     ,  T.  Kelloa     ,
G.   Latinoa,b     ,    P.   Lenzia,b     ,  M.  Lizzoa     ,  M.  Meschinia     ,   S.   Paolettia     ,
A. Papanastassioua,b, G. Sguazzonia     , L. Viliania

INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
L. Benussi    , S. Colafranceschi46     , S. Meola47     , D. Piccolo

INFN Sezione di Genovaa, Universit`a di Genovab, Genova, Italy
M. Alves Gallo Pereiraa     , F. Ferroa     , E. Robuttia     , S. Tosia,b

INFN Sezione di Milano-Bicoccaa, Universit`a di Milano-Bicoccab, Milano, Italy
A.  Benagliaa     ,   F.  Brivioa     ,  V.  Camagnia,b     ,   F.  Cetorellia,b     ,   F. De  Guioa,b     ,
M.E. Dinardoa,b     , P. Dinia     , S. Gennaia     , R. Gerosaa,b     , A. Ghezzia,b     , P. Govonia,b     ,
L.  Guzzia     ,  M.R.  Kima     ,  G.  Lavizzaria,b,  M.T.  Lucchinia,b     ,  M.  Malbertia     ,
S. Malvezzia     ,  A.  Massironia     ,  D. Menascea     ,  L. Moronia     , M.  Paganonia,b     ,
S. Palluottoa,b     , D. Pedrinia     , A. Peregoa,b     , G. Pizzatia,b     , T. Tabarelli de Fatisa,b

INFN Sezione di Napolia, Universit`a di Napoli ’Federico II’b, Napoli, Italy; Universit`a della
Basilicatac, Potenza, Italy; Scuola Superiore Meridionale (SSM)d, Napoli, Italy
S. Buontempoa     ,  F. Confortinia,b     , C. Di Fraiaa,b     ,  F. Fabozzia,c     ,  L. Favillaa,d     ,
A.O.M. Iorioa,b     , L. Listaa,b,48     , P. Paoluccia,27     , B. Rossia

INFN Sezione di Padovaa, Universit`a di Padovab, Padova, Italy; Universita degli Studi di
Cagliaric, Cagliari, Italy
P.  Azzia     ,  N.  Bacchettaa,49     ,   L.  Borellaa,   P.  Bortignona,c     ,  G.  Bortolatoa,b     ,
A.C.M.  Bullaa,c     ,  R.  Carlina,b     ,  P. Checchiaa     ,  T. Dorigoa,50     ,  F. Gasparinia,b     ,
U.  Gasparinia,b     ,  S.  Giorgettia     ,   F.  Gonellaa     ,  E.  Lusiania     ,  M.  Margonia,b     ,
A.T. Meneguzzoa,b     ,  J. Pazzinia,b     , F. Primaveraa,b     , P. Ronchesea,b     , R. Rossina,b     ,
F. Simonettoa,b     , M. Tosia,b     , A. Triossia,b     , S. Venturaa     , P. Zottoa,b     , A. Zucchettaa,b     ,
G. Zumerlea,b

INFN Sezione di Paviaa, Universit`a di Paviab, Pavia, Italy
A. Braghieria     , M. Brunoldia,b     , S. Calzaferria,b     , P. Montagnaa,b     , M. Pelliccionia,b     ,
V. Rea     , C. Riccardia,b     , P. Salvinia     , I. Vaia,b     , P. Vituloa,b

INFN Sezione di Perugiaa, Universit`a di Perugiab, Perugia, Italy
S.  Ajmala,b     ,  M.E.  Asciotia,b,  G.M.  Bilei†a     ,  C.  Carrivalea,b,  D.  Ciangottinia,b     ,
L. Della Pennaa,b,  L. Fan`oa,b     ,  V. Mariania,b     , M. Menichellia     ,  F. Moscatellia,51     ,
A. Rossia,b     , A. Santocchiaa,b     , D. Spigaa     , T. Tedeschia,b

INFN Sezione di Pisaa, Universit`a di Pisab, Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisac, Pisa, Italy;
Universit`a di Sienad, Siena, Italy

36


C. Aim`ea,b     , C.A. Alexea,c     , P. Asenova,b     , P. Azzurria     , G. Bagliesia     , L. Bianchinia,b     ,
T.  Boccalia     ,  E.  Bossinia     ,  D.  Bruschinia,c     ,  R.  Castaldia     ,   F.  Cattafestaa,c     ,
M.A.  Cioccia,d     ,  M.  Cipriania,b     ,  R.  Dell’Orsoa     ,  S.  Donatoa,b     ,  R.  Fortia,b     ,
A.  Giassia     ,   F.  Ligabuea,c     ,  A.C.  Marinia,b     ,  A.  Messineoa,b     ,   S.  Mishraa     ,
V.K. Muraleedharan Nair Bindhua,b     ,  S. Nandana     ,  F. Pallaa     , M.  Riggirelloa,c     ,
A. Rizzia,b     , G. Rolandia,c     ,  S. Roy Chowdhurya,52     ,  T. Sarkara     , A. Scribanoa     ,
P.  Solankia,b     ,   P.  Spagnoloa     ,   F.  Tenchinia,b     ,  R.  Tenchinia     ,  G.  Tonellia,b     ,
N. Turinia,d     , F. Vasellia,c     , A. Venturia     , P.G. Verdinia

INFN Sezione di Romaa, Sapienza Universit`a di Romab, Roma, Italy
P. Akrapa,b     , C. Basilea,b     , S.C. Beheraa     , F. Cavallaria     , L. Cunqueiro Mendeza,b     ,
F. De Riggia,b     , D. Del Rea,b     , M. Del Vecchioa,b     , E. Di Marcoa     , M. Diemoza     ,
F.  Erricoa     ,  L.  Frosinaa,b     ,  R. Gargiuloa,b     ,  B. Harikrishnana,b     ,  F. Lombardia,b,
E. Longoa,b     , L. Martikainena,b     , G. Organtinia,b     , N. Palmeria,b     , R. Paramattia,b     ,
T.  Paulettoa,b     ,  S.  Rahatloua,b     ,  C.  Rovellia     ,   F.  Santanastasioa,b     ,  L.  Soffia     ,
V. Vladimirova,b

INFN Sezione di Torinoa, Universit`a di Torinob, Torino, Italy; Universit`a del Piemonte
Orientalec, Novara, Italy
N. Amapanea,b     , R. Arcidiaconoa,c     , S. Argiroa,b     , M. Arneodo†a,c     , N. Bartosika,c     ,
R. Bellana,b     , A. Belloraa,b     , C. Biinoa     , C. Borcaa,b     , N. Cartigliaa     , M. Costaa,b     ,
R. Covarellia,b     , N. Demariaa     , E. Ferrandoa, L. Fincoa     , M. Grippoa,b     , B. Kiania,b     ,
L. Lanteria,b     , F. Leggera     , F. Luongoa,b     , C. Mariottia     , S. Masellia     , A. Meccaa,b     ,
L. Menzioa,b,  P. Meridiania     ,  E. Migliorea,b     , M. Montenoa     , M.M. Obertinoa,b     ,
G. Ortonaa     , L. Pachera,b     , N. Pastronea     , M. Ruspaa,c     , F. Sivieroa,b     , V. Solaa,b     ,
A.  Solanoa,b     ,  A.  Staianoa     ,  C.  Tarriconea,b     ,  D.  Trocinoa     ,  G.  Umoreta,b     ,
E. Vlasova,b     , R. Whitea,b

INFN Sezione di Triestea, Universit`a di Triesteb, Trieste, Italy
J.  Babbara,b,52     ,  S.  Belfortea     ,  V.  Candelisea,b     ,  M.  Casarsaa     ,   F.  Cossuttia     ,
K. De Leoa     , G. Della Riccaa,b     , R. Delli Gattia,b     , C. Giraldina,b

Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea
S. Dogra    , J. Hong    , J. Kim, T. Kim    , D. Lee    , H. Lee    , J. Lee, S.W. Lee    , C.S. Moon    ,
Y.D. Oh    , S. Sekmen    , B. Tae, Y.C. Yang

Department of Mathematics and Physics - GWNU, Gangneung, Korea
M.S. Kim

Chonnam National University, Institute for Universe and Elementary Particles, Kwangju,
Korea
G. Bak    , P. Gwak    , H. Kim    , D.H. Moon    , J. Seo

Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
E. Asilar    , F. Carnevali    , J. Choi53     , T.J. Kim    , Y. Ryou    , J. Song

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
S. Ha    , S. Han, B. Hong    , J. Kim    , K. Lee, K.S. Lee    , S. Lee    , J. Yoo

Kyung Hee University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
J. Goh    , J. Shin    , S. Yang

Sejong University, Seoul, Korea
Y. Kang    , H. S. Kim    , Y. Kim    , B. Ko, S. Lee

                                                                         37


Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
J. Almond, J.H. Bhyun, J. Choi    , J. Choi, W. Jun    , H. Kim    , J. Kim    , T. Kim, Y. Kim    ,
Y.W. Kim    , S. Ko    , H. Lee    , J. Lee    , J. Lee    , B.H. Oh    , J. Shin    , U.K. Yang, I. Yoon

University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
W. Jang    , D. Kim    , S. Kim    , J.S.H. Lee    , Y. Lee    , I.C. Park    , Y. Roh, I.J. Watson

Yonsei University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
G. Cho, K. Hwang    , B. Kim    , S. Kim, K. Lee    , H.D. Yoo

Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
Y. Lee    , I. Yu

College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle East (AUM),
Dasman, Kuwait
T. Beyrouthy    , Y. Gharbia

Kuwait University - College of Science - Department of Physics, Safat, Kuwait
F. Alazemi

Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia
K. Dreimanis    , O.M. Eberlins    , A. Gaile    , C. Munoz Diaz    , D. Osite    , G. Pikurs    ,
R. Plese    , A. Potrebko    , M. Seidel    , D. Sidiropoulos Kontos

University of Latvia (LU), Riga, Latvia
N.R. Strautnieks

Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
M. Ambrozas    , A. Juodagalvis    , S. Nargelas    , S. Nayak    , A. Rinkevicius    , G. Tamu-
laitis

National Centre for Particle Physics, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
I. Yusuff54     , Z. Zolkapli

Universidad de Sonora (UNISON), Hermosillo, Mexico
J.F. Benitez    ,  A. Castaneda Hernandez    ,  A. Cota Rodriguez    ,  L.E. Cuevas  Picos,
H.A. Encinas Acosta, L.G. Gallegos Mar´ı˜nez, J.A. Murillo Quijada    , L. Valencia Palomo

Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Mexico City, Mexico
G.  Ayala    ,  H.  Castilla-Valdez    ,  H.  Crotte  Ledesma    ,   R.  Lopez-Fernandez    ,
J. Mejia Guisao    , R. Reyes-Almanza    , A. S´anchez Hern´andez

Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico City, Mexico
C. Oropeza Barrera    , D.L. Ramirez Guadarrama, M. Ram´ırez Garc´ıa

Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico
I. Bautista    , F.E. Neri Huerta    , I. Pedraza    , H.A. Salazar Ibarguen    , C. Uribe Estrada

University of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro
I. Bubanja    , J. Mijuskovic    , N. Raicevic

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
P.H. Butler

National Centre for Physics, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
A. Ahmad    , M.I. Asghar    , A. Awais    , M.I.M. Awan, W.A. Khan

AGH University of Krakow, Krakow, Poland

38


V. Avati, L. Forthomme    , L. Grzanka    , M. Malawski    , K. Piotrzkowski

National Centre for Nuclear Research, Swierk, Poland
M. Bluj    , M. G´orski    , M. Kazana    , M. Szleper    , P. Zalewski

Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
K. Bunkowski    ,  K. Doroba    ,  A.  Kalinowski    ,  M.  Konecki    ,   J.  Krolikowski    ,
A. Muhammad

Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
P. Fokow    , K. Pozniak    , W. Zabolotny

Laborat´orio de Instrumenta¸c˜ao e F´ısica Experimental de Part´ıculas, Lisboa, Portugal
M. Araujo    , D. Bastos    ,  C.  Beir˜ao Da Cruz E  Silva    , A.  Boletti    , M. Bozzo    ,
T. Camporesi    , G. Da Molin    , M. Gallinaro    , J. Hollar    , N. Leonardo    , G.B. Marozzo    ,
A. Petrilli    , M. Pisano    , J. Seixas    , J. Varela    , J.W. Wulff

Faculty of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
P. Adzic    , L. Markovic    , P. Milenovic    , V. Milosevic

VINCA Institute of Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
D. Devetak    , M. Dordevic    , J. Milosevic    , L. Nadderd    , V. Rekovic, M. Stojanovic

Centro de  Investigaciones  Energ´eticas Medioambientales y  Tecnol´ogicas (CIEMAT),
Madrid, Spain
M. Alcalde Martinez    , J. Alcaraz Maestre    , Cristina F. Bedoya    , J.A. Brochero Cifuentes    ,
Oliver M. Carretero    , M. Cepeda    , M. Cerrada    , N. Colino    ,  B. De La Cruz    ,
A. Delgado Peris    , A. Escalante Del Valle    , D. Fern´andez Del Val    , J.P. Fern´andez Ramos    ,
J. Flix    , M.C. Fouz    , M. Gonzalez Hernandez    , O. Gonzalez Lopez    , S. Goy Lopez    ,
J.M. Hernandez    , M.I. Josa    , J. Llorente Merino    , C. Martin Perez    , E. Martin Viscasil-
las    , D. Moran    , C. M. Morcillo Perez    , ´A. Navarro Tobar    , R. Paz Herrera    , A. P´erez-
Calero Yzquierdo    , J. Puerta Pelayo    , I. Redondo    , J. Vazquez Escobar

Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
J.F. de Troc´oniz

Universidad de Oviedo, Instituto Universitario de Ciencias y Tecnolog´ıas Espaciales de
Asturias (ICTEA), Oviedo, Spain
B. Alvarez Gonzalez    , J. Ayllon Torresano    , A. Cardini    , J. Cuevas    , J. Del Riego Badas    ,
D.  Estrada Acevedo    ,   J. Fernandez Menendez    ,  S.  Folgueras    ,   I. Gonzalez Ca-
ballero    , P. Leguina    , M. Obeso Menendez    , E. Palencia Cortezon    ,  J. Prado Pico    ,
A. Soto Rodr´ıguez    , P. Vischia

Instituto de F´ısica de Cantabria (IFCA), CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain
S. Blanco Fern´andez    ,  I.J. Cabrillo    , A. Calderon    ,  J. Duarte Campderros    , M. Fer-
nandez    , G. Gomez    , C. Lasaosa Garc´ıa    , R. Lopez Ruiz    , C. Martinez Rivero    ,
P. Martinez Ruiz del Arbol    , F. Matorras    , P. Matorras Cuevas    , E. Navarrete Ramos    ,
J. Piedra Gomez    ,  C. Quintana San Emeterio    ,  L.  Scodellaro    ,   I.  Vila    ,  R.  Vi-
lar Cortabitarte    , J.M. Vizan Garcia

University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka
B. Kailasapathy55     , D.D.C. Wickramarathna

University of Ruhuna, Department of Physics, Matara, Sri Lanka
W.G.D. Dharmaratna56     , K. Liyanage    , N. Perera

                                                                         39


CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
D. Abbaneo    , C. Amendola    ,  R. Ardino    ,  E. Auffray    ,  J. Baechler, D. Barney    ,
J. Bendavid    ,  I. Bestintzanos, M. Bianco    , A. Bocci    ,  L. Borgonovi    , C. Botta    ,
A. Bragagnolo    , C.E. Brown    , C. Caillol    , G. Cerminara    , P. Connor    , K. Cormier    ,
D. d’Enterria    , A. Dabrowski    , P. Das    , A. David    , A. De Roeck    , M.M. Defranchis    ,
M.  Deile    , M. Dobson    ,  P.J. Fern´andez Manteca    ,  B.A. Fontana Santos Alves    ,
E. Fontanesi    , W. Funk    , A. Gaddi, S. Giani, D. Gigi, K. Gill    , F. Glege    , M. Glowacki,
A. Gruber    ,  J. Hegeman    ,  J.K. Heikkil¨a    , R. Hofsaess    ,  B. Huber    ,  T. James    ,
P. Janot    , O. Kaluzinska    , O. Karacheban25     , G. Karathanasis    , S. Laurila    , P. Lecoq    ,
E. Leutgeb    , C. Lourenc¸o    , A.-M. Lyon    , M. Magherini    , L. Malgeri    , M. Mannelli    ,
A. Mehta    , F. Meijers    , J.A. Merlin, S. Mersi    , E. Meschi    , M. Migliorini    , F. Monti    ,
F. Moortgat    , M. Mulders    , M. Musich    ,  I. Neutelings    , S. Orfanelli,  F. Pantaleo    ,
M. Pari    , G. Petrucciani    , A. Pfeiffer    , M. Pierini    , M. Pitt    , H. Qu    , D. Rabady    ,
A. Reimers    , B. Ribeiro Lopes    ,  F. Riti    ,  P. Rosado    , M. Rovere    , H. Sakulin    ,
R. Salvatico    , S. Sanchez Cruz    , S. Scarfi   , M. Selvaggi    , K. Shchelina    , P. Silva    ,
P. Sphicas57     , A.G. Stahl Leiton    , A. Steen    , S. Summers    , D. Treille    , P. Tropea    ,
E. Vernazza    ,  J. Wanczyk58     , S. Wuchterl    , M. Zarucki    ,  P. Zehetner    ,  P. Zejdl    ,
G. Zevi Della Porta

PSI Center for Neutron and Muon Sciences, Villigen, Switzerland
L. Caminada59     ,  W. Erdmann    ,  R.  Horisberger    ,  Q. Ingram    ,  H.C.  Kaestli    ,
D. Kotlinski    , C. Lange    , U. Langenegger    , A. Nigamova    , L. Noehte59     , T. Rohe    ,
A. Samalan

ETH Zurich - Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics (IPA), Zurich, Switzerland
T.K. Aarrestad    , M. Backhaus    ,  T. Bevilacqua59     , G. Bonomelli    , C. Cazzaniga    ,
K. Datta    ,  P. De Bryas Dexmiers D’Archiacchiac58     , A. De Cosa    , G. Dissertori    ,
M. Dittmar, M. Doneg`a    ,  F. Glessgen    ,  C. Grab    , N. H¨arringer    ,  T.G. Harte    ,
W. Lustermann    , M. Malucchi    , R.A. Manzoni    ,  L. Marchese    , A. Mascellani58     ,
F. Nessi-Tedaldi    ,  F. Pauss    , B. Ristic    , S. Rohletter, R. Seidita    ,  J. Steggemann58     ,
A. Tarabini    , C.Z. Tee    , D. Valsecchi    , R. Wallny

Universit¨at Z¨urich, Zurich, Switzerland
C. Amsler60     , P. B¨artschi    , F. Bilandzija    , M.F. Canelli    , G. Celotto    , V. Guglielmi    ,
A. Jofrehei    , B. Kilminster    , T.H. Kwok    , S. Leontsinis    , V. Lukashenko    , A. Mac-
chiolo    ,  F. Meng    , M. Missiroli    ,  J. Motta    ,  P. Robmann, E. Shokr    ,  F. St¨ager    ,
R. Tramontano    , P. Viscone

National Central University, Chung-Li, Taiwan
D. Bhowmik, C.M. Kuo, P.K. Rout    , S. Taj    , P.C. Tiwari36

National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan
L. Ceard,  K.F. Chen    ,  Z.g. Chen, A. De Iorio    ,  W.-S. Hou    ,  T.h. Hsu,  Y.w. Kao,
S. Karmakar    , G. Kole    , Y.y. Li    , R.-S. Lu    , E. Paganis    , X.f. Su    , J. Thomas-Wilsker    ,
L.s. Tsai, D. Tsionou, H.y. Wu    , E. Yazgan

High Energy  Physics  Research  Unit,  Department  of  Physics,  Faculty  of  Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
C. Asawatangtrakuldee    , N. Srimanobhas

Tunis El Manar University, Tunis, Tunisia
Y. Maghrbi

40


C¸ukurova University, Physics Department, Science and Art Faculty, Adana, Turkey
D. Agyel    , F. Dolek    , I. Dumanoglu61     , Y. Guler62     , E. Gurpinar Guler62     , C. Isik    ,
O. Kara63     , A. Kayis Topaksu    , Y. Komurcu    , G. Onengut    , K. Ozdemir64     , B. Tali65     ,
U.G. Tok    , E. Uslan    , I.S. Zorbakir

Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
S. Sen

Middle East Technical University, Physics Department, Ankara, Turkey
M. Yalvac66

Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Akgun    , I.O. Atakisi67     , E. G¨ulmez    , M. Kaya68     , O. Kaya69     , M.A. Sarkisla70,
S. Tekten71

Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
D. Boncukcu    , A. Cakir    , K. Cankocak61,72

Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Hacisahinoglu    ,  I. Hos73     , B. Kaynak    , S. Ozkorucuklu    , O. Potok    , H. Sert    ,
C. Simsek    , C. Zorbilmez

Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
S. Cerci    , C. Dozen74     , B. Isildak    , E. Simsek    , D. Sunar Cerci    , T. Yetkin74

Institute for Scintillation Materials of National Academy of Science of Ukraine, Kharkiv,
Ukraine
A. Boyaryntsev    , O. Dadazhanova, B. Grynyov

National Science Centre, Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology, Kharkiv, Ukraine
L. Levchuk

University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
J.J. Brooke    , A. Bundock    ,  F. Bury    , E. Clement    , D. Cussans    , D. Dharmender,
H. Flacher    ,  J. Goldstein    , H.F. Heath    , M.-L. Holmberg    , L. Kreczko    , S. Parames-
varan    , L. Robertshaw    , M.S. Sanjrani39, J. Segal, V.J. Smith

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
A.H. Ball, K.W. Bell    , A. Belyaev75     , C. Brew    , R.M. Brown    , D.J.A. Cockerill    ,
A. Elliot    , K.V. Ellis, J. Gajownik    , K. Harder    , S. Harper    , J. Linacre    , K. Manolopoulos,
M. Moallemi    , D.M. Newbold    , E. Olaiya    , D. Petyt    , T. Reis    , A.R. Sahasransu    ,
G. Salvi    ,  T. Schuh, C.H. Shepherd-Themistocleous    ,  I.R. Tomalin    , K.C. Whalen    ,
T. Williams

Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
I. Andreou    ,  R. Bainbridge    ,  P. Bloch    , O. Buchmuller, C.A.  Carrillo Montoya    ,
D. Colling    , I. Das    , P. Dauncey    , G. Davies    , M. Della Negra    , S. Fayer, G. Fedi    ,
G. Hall    , H.R. Hoorani    , A. Howard, G. Iles    , C.R. Knight    , P. Krueper    , J. Langford    ,
K.H. Law    ,  J. Le´on Holgado    , L. Lyons    , A.-M. Magnan    , B. Maier    , S. Mallios    ,
A.  Mastronikolis    , M. Mieskolainen    ,   J. Nash76     , M.  Pesaresi    ,  P.B. Pradeep    ,
B.C. Radburn-Smith    , A. Richards, A. Rose    , L. Russell    , K. Savva    , R. Schmitz    ,
C. Seez    , R. Shukla    , A. Tapper    , K. Uchida    , G.P. Uttley    , T. Virdee27     , M. Vojinovic    ,
N. Wardle    , D. Winterbottom    , J. Xiao

Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom

                                                                         41


J.E. Cole    , A. Khan, P. Kyberd    , I.D. Reid

Baylor University, Waco, Texas, USA
S.  Abdullin    ,  A.  Brinkerhoff    ,   E.  Collins    ,  M.R.  Darwish    ,    J.  Dittmann    ,
K. Hatakeyama    , V. Hegde    , J. Hiltbrand    , B. McMaster    , J. Samudio    , S. Sawant    ,
C. Sutantawibul    , J. Wilson

Bethel University, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
J.M. Hogan

Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA
R. Bartek    , A. Dominguez    , S. Raj    , B. Sahu    , A.E. Simsek    , S.S. Yu

The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA
B. Bam    ,  A.  Buchot  Perraguin    ,  S.  Campbell,  R. Chudasama    ,   S.I. Cooper    ,
C. Crovella    , G. Fidalgo    , S.V. Gleyzer    , A. Khukhunaishvili    , K. Matchev    , E. Pearson,
P. Rumerio77     , E. Usai    , R. Yi

Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
S. Cholak    , G. De Castro,  Z. Demiragli    ,  C. Erice    ,  C. Fangmeier    ,  C. Fernan-
dez Madrazo    , J. Fulcher    , F. Golf    , S. Jeon    , J. O’Cain, I. Reed    , J. Rohlf    , K. Salyer    ,
D. Sperka    , D. Spitzbart    , I. Suarez    , A. Tsatsos    , E. Wurtz, A.G. Zecchinelli

Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
G. Barone    , G. Benelli    , D. Cutts    , S. Ellis    , L. Gouskos    , M. Hadley    , U. Heintz    ,
K.W. Ho    , T. Kwon    , L. Lambrecht    , G. Landsberg    , K.T. Lau    , J. Luo    , S. Mondal    ,
J. Roloff    , T. Russell    , S. Sagir78     , X. Shen    , M. Stamenkovic    , N. Venkatasubramanian

University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
S.   Abbott    ,     S.   Baradia    ,     B.   Barton    ,    R.   Breedon    ,    H.   Cai    ,
M. Calderon De La Barca Sanchez    , E. Cannaert, M. Chertok    , M. Citron    , J. Conway    ,
P.T. Cox    ,   F.  Eble    ,  R.  Erbacher    ,  O.  Kukral    ,  G.  Mocellin    ,  S. Ostrom    ,
I. Salazar Segovia, J.S. Tafoya Vargas    , W. Wei    , S. Yoo

University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA
K. Adamidis, M. Bachtis    , D. Campos, R. Cousins    , S. Crossley    , G. Flores Avila    ,
J.  Hauser    ,  M.  Ignatenko    ,  M.A.  Iqbal    ,   T. Lam    ,   Y.f.  Lo    ,  E. Manca    ,
A. Nunez Del Prado    , D. Saltzberg    , V. Valuev

University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA
R. Clare    , J.W. Gary    , G. Hanson

University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
A. Aportela    ,  A. Arora    ,  J.G. Branson    ,  S.  Cittolin    ,  B. D’Anzi    ,  D. Diaz    ,
J. Duarte    , L. Giannini    , Y. Gu, J. Guiang    , V. Krutelyov    , R. Lee    , J. Letts    , H. Li,
M. Masciovecchio    , F. Mokhtar    , S. Mukherjee    , M. Pieri    , D. Primosch, M. Quinnan    ,
V. Sharma    , M. Tadel    , E. Vourliotis    , F. W¨urthwein    , A. Yagil    , Z. Zhao

University of California, Santa Barbara - Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, California,
USA
A. Barzdukas    , L. Brennan    , C. Campagnari    , S. Carron Montero79     , K. Downham    ,
C. Grieco    , M.M. Hussain,   J. Incandela    , M.W.K.  Lai,  A.J.  Li    ,  P. Masterson    ,
J. Richman    , S.N. Santpur    , D. Stuart    , T. ´A. V´ami    , X. Yan    , D. Zhang

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA

42


A. Albert    , S. Bhattacharya    , A. Bornheim    , O. Cerri, R. Kansal    , H.B. Newman    ,
G. Reales Guti´errez, T. Sievert, M. Spiropulu    , C. Sun    , J.R. Vlimant    , R.A. Wynne    ,
S. Xie

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
J. Alison    , S. An    , M. Cremonesi, V. Dutta    , E.Y. Ertorer    , T. Ferguson    , T.A. G´omez Es-
pinosa    , A. Harilal    , A. Kallil Tharayil, M. Kanemura, C. Liu    , M. Marchegiani    ,
P. Meiring    , S. Murthy    , P. Palit    , K. Park    , M. Paulini    , A. Roberts    , A. Sanchez

University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA
J.P. Cumalat    , W.T. Ford    , A. Hart    , S. Kwan    , J. Pearkes    , C. Savard    , N. Schonbeck    ,
K. Stenson    , K.A. Ulmer    , S.R. Wagner    , N. Zipper    , D. Zuolo

Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
J. Alexander    , X. Chen    ,  J. Dickinson    , A. Duquette,  J. Fan    , X. Fan    ,  J. Grassi    ,
S. Hogan    , P. Kotamnives    , J. Monroy    , G. Niendorf    , M. Oshiro    , J.R. Patterson    ,
A. Ryd    , J. Thom    , H.A. Weber    , B. Weiss    , P. Wittich    , R. Zou    , L. Zygala

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois, USA
M. Albrow    , M. Alyari    , O. Amram    , G. Apollinari    , A. Apresyan    , L.A.T. Bauerdick    ,
D.  Berry    ,   J.  Berryhill    ,  P.C. Bhat    ,  K.  Burkett    ,  J.N.  Butler    ,  A. Canepa    ,
G.B. Cerati    , H.W.K. Cheung    , F. Chlebana    , C. Cosby    , G. Cummings    , I. Dutta    ,
V.D. Elvira    , J. Freeman    , A. Gandrakota    , Z. Gecse    , L. Gray    , D. Green, A. Grum-
mer    , S. Gr¨unendahl    , D. Guerrero    , O. Gutsche    , R.M. Harris    ,  J. Hirschauer    ,
V. Innocente    , B. Jayatilaka    ,  S. Jindariani    , M. Johnson    , U. Joshi    , R.S. Kim    ,
B. Klima    , S. Lammel    , D. Lincoln    , R. Lipton    , T. Liu    , K. Maeshima    , D. Mason    ,
P. McBride    , P. Merkel    , S. Mrenna    , S. Nahn    , J. Ngadiuba    , D. Noonan    , S. Norberg,
V. Papadimitriou    , N. Pastika    , K. Pedro    , C. Pena80     , C.E. Perez Lara    , V. Perovic    ,
F. Ravera    , A. Reinsvold Hall81     ,  L. Ristori    , M. Safdari    ,  E. Sexton-Kennedy    ,
E. Smith    , N. Smith    , A. Soha    , L. Spiegel    , S. Stoynev    ,  J. Strait    , L. Taylor    ,
S. Tkaczyk    , N.V. Tran    , L. Uplegger    , E.W. Vaandering    , C. Wang    , I. Zoi

University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
C. Aruta    ,  P. Avery    ,  D. Bourilkov    ,  P. Chang    ,  V. Cherepanov    ,  R.D.  Field,
C. Huh    , E. Koenig    , M. Kolosova    , J. Konigsberg    , A. Korytov    , G. Mitselmakher    ,
K. Mohrman    , A. Muthirakalayil Madhu    , N. Rawal    , S. Rosenzweig    , V. Sulimov    ,
Y. Takahashi    , J. Wang

Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA
T. Adams    , A. Al Kadhim    , A. Askew    , S. Bower    , R. Goff, R. Hashmi    , A. Hassani    ,
T. Kolberg    , G. Martinez    , M. Mazza    , H. Prosper    , P.R. Prova, R. Yohay

Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Florida, USA
B. Alsufyani    , S. Butalla    , S. Das    , M. Hohlmann    , M. Lavinsky, E. Yanes

University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
M.R. Adams    , N. Barnett, A. Baty    , C. Bennett    , R. Cavanaugh    , R. Escobar Franco    ,
O. Evdokimov    , C.E. Gerber    , H. Gupta    , M. Hawksworth    , A. Hingrajiya, D.J. Hof-
man    , Z. Huang    ,  J.h. Lee    , C. Mills    , S. Nanda    , G. Nigmatkulov    , B. Ozek    ,
T. Phan, D. Pilipovic    , R. Pradhan    , E. Prifti, P. Roy, T. Roy    , D. Shekar, N. Singh, A. Thielen,
M.B. Tonjes    , N. Varelas    , M.A. Wadud    , J. Yoo

The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
M. Alhusseini    , D. Blend    , K. Dilsiz82     , O.K. K¨oseyan    , A. Mestvirishvili83     , O. Neogi,

                                                                         43


H. Ogul84     , Y. Onel    , A. Penzo    , C. Snyder, E. Tiras85

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
B. Blumenfeld    ,  J. Davis    , A.V. Gritsan    , L. Kang    , S. Kyriacou    , P. Maksimovic    ,
M. Roguljic    , S. Sekhar    , M.V. Srivastav    , M. Swartz

The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA
A. Abreu    , L.F. Alcerro Alcerro    ,  J. Anguiano    , S. Arteaga Escatel    ,  P. Baringer    ,
A. Bean    ,  R. Bhattacharya    ,  Z. Flowers    , D. Grove    ,   J. King    , G. Krintiras    ,
M. Lazarovits    , C. Le Mahieu    , J. Marquez    , M. Murray    , M. Nickel    , S. Popescu86     ,
C. Rogan    , C. Royon    , S. Rudrabhatla    , S. Sanders    , C. Smith    , G. Wilson

Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA
B. Allmond    , N. Islam, A. Ivanov    , K. Kaadze    , Y. Maravin    , J. Natoli    , G.G. Reddy    ,
D. Roy    , G. Sorrentino

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
A. Baden    , A. Belloni    ,  J. Bistany-riebman, S.C. Eno    ,  N.J. Hadley    ,  S. Jabeen    ,
R.G. Kellogg    ,  T. Koeth    ,  B. Kronheim,  S. Lascio    ,  P. Major    , A.C. Mignerey    ,
C. Palmer    , C. Papageorgakis    , M.M. Paranjpe, E. Popova87     , A. Shevelev    , L. Zhang

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
C. Baldenegro Barrera    , H. Bossi    ,  S. Bright-Thonney    ,  I.A. Cali    ,  Y.c. Chen    ,
P.c. Chou    , M. D’Alfonso    ,  J. Eysermans    , C. Freer    , G. Gomez-Ceballos    , M. Gon-
charov, G. Grosso    , P. Harris, D. Hoang    , G.M. Innocenti    , K. Ivanov    , G. Kopp    ,
D. Kovalskyi    ,  L. Lavezzo    ,  Y.-J. Lee    ,  K. Long    ,  C. Mcginn    ,  A. Novak    ,
M.I. Park    , C. Paus    , C. Reissel    , C. Roland    , G. Roland    , S. Rothman    , T.a. Sheng    ,
G.S.F. Stephans    , D. Walter    , J. Wang, Z. Wang    , B. Wyslouch    , T. J. Yang

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
A. Alpana    , B. Crossman    , W.J. Jackson, C. Kapsiak    , M. Krohn    , D. Mahon    , J. Mans    ,
B. Marzocchi    , R. Rusack    , O. Sancar    , R. Saradhy    , N. Strobbe

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA
K. Bloom    ,  D.R.  Claes    ,  G. Haza    ,   J.  Hossain    ,  C.  Joo    ,   I. Kravchenko    ,
K.H.M. Kwok    , A. Rohilla    , J.E. Siado    , W. Tabb    , A. Vagnerini    , A. Wightman

State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
H. Bandyopadhyay    ,  L. Hay    ,  H.w.  Hsia    ,   I.  Iashvili    ,  A.  Kalogeropoulos    ,
A. Kharchilava    , A. Mandal    , M. Morris    , D. Nguyen    , O. Poncet    , S. Rappoccio    ,
H. Rejeb Sfar, W. Terrill    , A. Williams    , D. Yu

Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
A. Aarif    , G. Alverson    , E. Barberis    , J. Bonilla    , B. Bylsma, M. Campana    , J. Dervan    ,
Y. Haddad    , Y. Han    , I. Israr    , A. Krishna    , M. Lu    , N. Manganelli    , R. Mccarthy    ,
D.M. Morse    , T. Orimoto    , L. Skinnari    , C.S. Thoreson    , E. Tsai    , D. Wood

Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
S. Dittmer    , K.A. Hahn    , M. Mcginnis    , Y. Miao    , D.G. Monk    , M.H. Schmitt    ,
A. Taliercio    , M. Velasco    , J. Wang

University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA
G. Agarwal    ,  R. Band    ,  R. Bucci,  S.  Castells    , A. Das    , A. Datta    , A. Ehnis,
R. Goldouzian    , M. Hildreth    ,  K. Hurtado Anampa    ,  T. Ivanov    ,  C. Jessop    ,
A. Karneyeu    , K. Lannon    ,  J. Lawrence    , N. Loukas    , L. Lutton    ,  J. Mariano    ,

44


N. Marinelli, P. Mastrapasqua    , T. McCauley    , C. Mcgrady    , C. Moore    , Y. Musienko21     ,
H. Nelson    , M. Osherson    , A.  Piccinelli    ,  R. Ruchti    , A. Townsend    ,  Y. Wan,
M. Wayne    , H. Yockey

The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
M. Carrigan    , R. De Los Santos    , L.S. Durkin    , C. Hill    , M. Joyce    , D.A. Wenzl,
B.L. Winer    , B. R. Yates

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
H. Bouchamaoui    , G. Dezoort    , P. Elmer    , A. Frankenthal    , M. Galli    , B. Greenberg    ,
N. Haubrich    , K. Kennedy, Y. Lai    , D. Lange    , A. Loeliger    , D. Marlow    , I. Ojalvo    ,
J. Olsen    , F. Simpson    , D. Stickland    , C. Tully

University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, USA
S. Malik    , R. Sharma

Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
S. Chandra    , A. Gu    , L. Gutay, M. Huwiler    , M. Jones    , A.W. Jung    , D. Kondratyev    ,
J. Li    , M. Liu    , M. Macedo    , G. Negro    , N. Neumeister    , G. Paspalaki    , S. Piperov    ,
N.R. Saha    , J.F. Schulte    , F. Wang    , A. Wildridge    , W. Xie    , Y. Yao    , Y. Zhong

Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, Indiana, USA
N. Parashar    , A. Pathak    , E. Shumka

Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA
D. Acosta    , A. Agrawal    , C. Arbour    , T. Carnahan    , K.M. Ecklund    , F.J.M. Geurts    ,
T. Huang    , I. Krommydas    , N. Lewis, W. Li    , J. Lin    , O. Miguel Colin    , B.P. Padley    ,
R. Redjimi    , J. Rotter    , C. Vico Villalba    , M. Wulansatiti    , E. Yigitbasi    , Y. Zhang

University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA
O. Bessidskaia Bylund, A. Bodek    , P. de Barbaro†     , R. Demina    , A. Garcia-Bellido    ,
H.S. Hare    , O. Hindrichs    , N. Parmar    , P. Parygin87     , H. Seo    , R. Taus    , Y.h. Yu

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA
B.  Chiarito,   J.P. Chou    ,  S.V.  Clark    ,  S.  Donnelly,  D. Gadkari    ,  Y.  Gershtein    ,
E. Halkiadakis    , C. Houghton    , D. Jaroslawski    , A. Kobert    , I. Laflotte    , A. Lath    ,
J. Martins    , M. Perez Prada    , B. Rand    , J. Reichert    , P. Saha    , S. Salur    , S. Somalwar    ,
R. Stone    , S.A. Thayil    , S. Thomas, J. Vora

University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
D. Ally    , A.G. Delannoy    ,  S. Fiorendi    ,  J. Harris,  T. Holmes    , A.R. Kanuganti    ,
N. Karunarathna    , J. Lawless, L. Lee    , E. Nibigira    , B. Skipworth, S. Spanier

Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
D. Aebi    , M. Ahmad    , T. Akhter    , K. Androsov    , A. Basnet    , A. Bolshov, O. Bouhali88     ,
A. Cagnotta    , S. Cooperstein    , V. D’Amante    , R. Eusebi    , P. Flanagan    , J. Gilmore    ,
Y. Guo, T. Kamon    , S. Luo    , R. Mueller    , A. Safonov

Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA
N. Akchurin    , J. Damgov    , Y. Feng    , N. Gogate    , W. Jin    , S.W. Lee    , C. Madrid    ,
A. Mankel    , T. Peltola    , I. Volobouev

Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
E. Appelt    , Y. Chen    , S. Greene, A. Gurrola    , W. Johns    , R. Kunnawalkam Elayavalli    ,
A. Melo    , D. Rathjens    , F. Romeo    , P. Sheldon    , S. Tuo    , J. Velkovska    , J. Viinikainen    ,

                                                                         45


J. Zhang

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
B. Cardwell    , H. Chung    , B. Cox    , J. Hakala    , G. Hamilton Ilha Machado, R. Hirosky    ,
M. Jose, A. Ledovskoy    , C. Mantilla    , C. Neu    , C. Ram´on ´Alvarez    , Z. Wu

Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
S. Bhattacharya    , P.E. Karchin

University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
A. Aravind    , S. Banerjee    , K. Black    , T. Bose    , E. Chavez    , S. Dasu    , P. Everaerts    ,
C. Galloni, H. He    , M. Herndon    , A. Herve    , C.K. Koraka    , S. Lomte    , R. Loveless    ,
A. Mallampalli    , A. Mohammadi    ,  S. Mondal,  T. Nelson, G. Parida    ,  L.  P´etr´e    ,
D. Pinna    , A. Savin, V. Shang    , V. Sharma    , R. Simeon, W.H. Smith    , D. Teague,
A. Warden

Authors affiliated with an international laboratory covered by a cooperation agreement with
CERN
S. Afanasiev    , V. Alexakhin    , Yu. Andreev    , T. Aushev    , D. Budkouski    , R. Chistov    ,
M. Danilov    , T. Dimova    , A. Ershov    , S. Gninenko    ,  I. Gorbunov    , A. Kamenev    ,
V. Karjavine    , M. Kirsanov    , V. Klyukhin    , O. Kodolova89     , V. Korenkov    ,  I. Ko-
rsakov,  A. Kozyrev    , N. Krasnikov    ,  A. Lanev    ,  A. Malakhov    ,  V. Matveev    ,
A. Nikitenko90,89     ,  V. Palichik    ,  V. Perelygin    ,  S. Petrushanko    , O. Radchenko    ,
M. Savina    ,  V. Shalaev    ,  S. Shmatov    ,  S. Shulha    ,  Y. Skovpen    , K. Slizhevskiy,
V. Smirnov    , O. Teryaev    ,  I. Tlisova    , A. Toropin    , N. Voytishin    , A. Zarubin    ,
I. Zhizhin

Authors affiliated with an institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
L. Dudko    , V. Kim21     , V. Murzin    , V. Oreshkin    , D. Sosnov    , E. Boos    , V. Bunichev    ,
M. Dubinin80     , A. Gribushin    , V. Savrin    , A. Snigirev

†: Deceased
1Also at Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia
2Also at TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3Also at Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
4Also at FACAMP - Faculdades de Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil
5Also at Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
6Also at Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil
7Also at The University of the State of Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil
8Also at University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
9Also at University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
10Also at School of Physics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
11Now at Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, China
12Also at University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
13Also at The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
14Also at Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
15Also at Center for High Energy Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China
16Also at Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt
17Now at Zewail City of Science and Technology, Zewail, Egypt
18Also at Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt
19Also at Universit´e de Haute Alsace, Mulhouse, France
20Also at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA

46


21Also at an institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
22Also at University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
23Also at RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
24Also at Bergische University Wuppertal (BUW), Wuppertal, Germany
25Also at Brandenburg University of Technology, Cottbus, Germany
26Also at Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, Juelich, Germany
27Also at CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
28Also at HUN-REN ATOMKI - Institute of Nuclear Research, Debrecen, Hungary
29Now at Universitatea Babes-Bolyai - Facultatea de Fizica, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
30Also at MTA-ELTE Lend¨ulet CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group, E¨otv¨os Lor´and
University, Budapest, Hungary
31Also at HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
32Also at Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt
33Also at The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA
34Also at Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India
35Also at University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
36Also at Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, India
37Also at University of Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan, India
38Also at Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar, India
39Also at Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
40Also at Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
41Also at Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
42Also at Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of Mazandaran,
Behshahr, Iran
43Also at Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Arak University, ARAK, Iran
44Also at Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic
Development, Bologna, Italy
45Also at Centro Siciliano di Fisica Nucleare e di Struttura Della Materia, Catania, Italy
46Also at James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Maryland, USA
47Also at Universit`a degli Studi Guglielmo Marconi, Roma, Italy
48Also at Scuola Superiore Meridionale, Universit`a di Napoli ’Federico II’, Napoli, Italy
49Also at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois, USA
50Also at Lulea University of Technology, Lulea, Sweden
51Also at Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Officina dei Materiali, Perugia, Italy
52Also at UPES - University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, India
53Also at Institut de Physique des 2 Infinis de Lyon (IP2I ), Villeurbanne, France
54Also at Department of Applied Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia
55Also at Trincomalee Campus, Eastern University, Sri Lanka, Nilaveli, Sri Lanka
56Also at Saegis Campus, Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
57Also at National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
58Also at Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
59Also at Universit¨at Z¨urich, Zurich, Switzerland
60Also at Stefan Meyer Institute for Subatomic Physics, Vienna, Austria
61Also at Near East University, Research Center of Experimental Health Science, Mersin,
Turkey
62Also at Konya Technical University, Konya, Turkey
63Also at Istanbul Topkapi University, Istanbul, Turkey
64Also at Izmir Bakircay University, Izmir, Turkey

                                                                         47


65Also at Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, Turkey
66Also at Bozok Universitetesi Rekt¨orl¨ug¨u, Yozgat, Turkey
67Also at Istanbul Sabahattin Zaim University, Istanbul, Turkey
68Also at Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey
69Also at Milli Savunma University, Istanbul, Turkey
70Also at Informatics and Information Security Research Center, Gebze/Kocaeli, Turkey
71Also at Kafkas University, Kars, Turkey
72Now at Istanbul Okan University, Istanbul, Turkey
73Also at Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa, Faculty of Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey
74Also at Istinye University, Istanbul, Turkey
75Also at School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom
76Also at Monash University, Faculty of Science, Clayton, Australia
77Also at Universit`a di Torino, Torino, Italy
78Also at Karamano˘glu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, Turkey
79Also at California Lutheran University, Thousand Oaks, California, USA
80Also at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA
81Also at United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, USA
82Also at Bingol University, Bingol, Turkey
83Also at Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
84Also at Sinop University, Sinop, Turkey
85Also at Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey
86Also at Horia Hulubei National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering (IFIN-HH),
Bucharest, Romania
87Now at another institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
88Also at Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Doha, Qatar
89Also at Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
90Also at Imperial College, London, United Kingdom