                                                 Draft version November 1, 2021
                                                 Typeset using LATEX default style in AASTeX63




                                                                              The Black Hole Mass Function Across Cosmic Times
                                                                                   I. Stellar Black Holes and Light Seed Distribution
                                                               1                 1, 2, 3, 4
                                                Alex Sicilia, Andrea Lapi,   Lumen Boco,1, 2 Mario Spera,1, 2, 3 Ugo N. Di Carlo,5, 6 Michela Mapelli,5, 6, 7
                                                         Francesco Shankar, David M. Alexander,9 Alessandro Bressan,1, 2 and Luigi Danese1, 2
                                                                           8

                                                                                               1 SISSA, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy
                                                                   2 IFPU - Institute for fundamental physics of the Universe, Via Beirut 2, 34014 Trieste, Italy
                                                                                   3 INFN-Sezione di Trieste, via Valerio 2, 34127 Trieste, Italy




arXiv:2110.15607v1 [astro-ph.GA] 29 Oct 2021
                                                                                              4 IRA-INAF, Via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy
                                                    5 Physics and Astronomy Department Galileo Galilei, University of Padova, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 3, 35122 Padova, Italy
                                                                                 6 INFN-Sezione di Padova, Via Marzolo 8, 35131 Padova, Italy
                                                                                  7 INAF-OAPD, Vicolo dell’Osservatorio 5, 35122 Padova, Italy
                                                                   8 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Highfield SO17 1BJ, UK
                                                                        9 Department of Physics, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK



                                                                                                               ABSTRACT
                                                          This is the first paper in a series aimed at modeling the black hole (BH) mass function, from the
                                                       stellar to the intermediate to the (super)massive regime. In the present work we focus on stellar
                                                       BHs and provide an ab-initio computation of their mass function across cosmic times; we mainly
                                                       consider the standard, and likely dominant production channel of stellar-mass BHs constituted by
                                                       isolated single/binary star evolution. Specifically, we exploit the state-of-the-art stellar and binary
                                                       evolutionary code SEVN, and couple its outputs with redshift-dependent galaxy statistics and empirical
                                                       scaling relations involving galaxy metallicity, star-formation rate and stellar mass. The resulting relic
                                                       mass function dN/dV d log m• as a function of the BH mass m• features a rather flat shape up to
                                                       m• ≈ 50 M and then a log-normal decline for larger masses, while its overall normalization at a
                                                       given mass increases with decreasing redshift. We highlight the contribution to the local mass function
                                                       from isolated stars evolving into BHs and from binary stellar systems ending up in single or binary
                                                       BHs. We also include the distortion on the mass function induced by binary BH mergers, finding
                                                       that it has a minor effect at the high-mass end. We estimate a local stellar BH relic mass density of
                                                       ρ• ≈ 5 × 107 M Mpc−3 , which exceeds by more than two orders of magnitude that in supermassive
                                                       BHs; this translates into an energy density parameter Ω• ≈ 4 × 10−4 , implying that the total mass in
                                                       stellar BHs amounts to . 1% of the local baryonic matter. We show how our mass function for merging
                                                       BH binaries compares with the recent estimates from gravitational wave observations by LIGO/Virgo,
                                                       and discuss the possible implications for dynamical formation of BH binaries in dense environments
                                                       like star clusters. We address the impact of adopting different binary stellar evolution codes (SEVN
                                                       and COSMIC) on the mass function, and find the main differences to occur at the high mass end, in
                                                       connection with the numerical treatment of stellar binary evolution effects. We highlight that our
                                                       results can provide a firm theoretical basis for a physically-motivated light seed distribution at high
                                                       redshift, to be implemented in semi-analytic and numerical models of BH formation and evolution.
                                                       Finally, we stress that the present work can constitute a starting point to investigate the origin of
                                                       heavy seeds and the growth of (super)massive BHs in high-redshift star-forming galaxies, that we will
                                                       pursue in forthcoming papers.

                                                       Keywords: Stellar mass black holes (1611) - Galaxy formation (595) - Stellar evolution (1599)


                                                                                                          1. INTRODUCTION
                                                 The formation and evolution of black holes (BHs) in the Universe is one of the major issue to be addressed by
                                               the modern research in astrophysics and cosmology. In the mass range m• ∼ 5 − 150 M , BHs are originated from
                                               the final, often dramatic stages in the evolution of massive stars (possibly hosted in binary systems). These compact
2                                                  A. Sicilia et al.

remnants can produce luminous X-ray binaries (e.g., Mapelli et al. 2010; Farr et al. 2011; Inoue et al. 2016), can
constitute powerful sources of gravitational waves for ground-based detectors like the current LIGO/Virgo facility
(e.g., Belczynski et al. 2010; Dominik et al. 2015; Spera et al. 2017, 2019; Boco et al. 2019; Abbott et al. 2021a,b),
can possibly energize short gamma-ray bursts and associated kilonovas (e.g., Abbott et al. 2020, 2021c; Ackley et
al. 2020; Gompertz et al. 2020), can inject strong energy inputs in the primeval Universe (e.g., Mirabel et al. 2011;
Justham & Schawinski 2012; Artale et al. 2015; Madau & Fragos 2017; Lehmer et al. 2021), and can provide light
seeds for the subsequent growth of more massive BHs (e.g., Madau et al. 2014; Volonteri et al. 2015; Lupi et al.
2016; Pacucci et al. 2017; Boco et al. 2020; Das et al. 2021). At the other end, in the range M• ∼ 106 − 1010 M ,
supermassive BHs grow mainly by gaseous accretion, that energize the spectacular broadband emission of AGNs. Such
an activity can have a profound impact on galaxy evolution (e.g., Alexander & Hickox 2012; Lapi et al. 2014, 2018),
as testified by the strict relationships between the relic BH masses and the physical properties of the hosts (e.g.,
Kormendy & Ho 2013; Shankar et al. 2016, 2020; Zhu et al. 2021). The intermediate mass range m• ∼ 103 − 106 M
is the most uncertain. So far, only tentative evidence of these systems has been identified (see Paynter et al. 2021).
However, the chase is open in view of their astrophysical relevance. Most noticeably, they can provide heavy seeds for
quick (super)massive BHs growth (e.g., Mayer & Bonoli 2019; Boco et al. 2020), as it seems required by the puzzling
observations of an increasing numbers of giant monsters M• & 109 M when the age of the Universe was shorter than
. 0.8 Gyr (e.g., Mortlock et al. 2011; Venemans et al. 2017; Banados et al. 2018). Moreover, such intermediate-mass
BHs will constitute important targets for space-based gravitational wave detectors like LISA and DECIGO (see eLISA
Consortium 2013; Kawamura et al. 2021; also Boco et al. 2021a; Barausse & Lapi 2021).
   One of the most fundamental quantity for demographic studies of the BH population is constituted by the relic mass
function, namely the number density of BHs per comoving volume and unit BH mass, as a function of redshift. In
the supermassive regime, where most of the BH mass is accumulated through gas accretion, this is usually determined
from the AGN luminosity function via Soltan (1982)-type or continuity equation arguments (e.g., Small & Blandford
1992; Salucci 1999; Yu & Lu 2004; Merloni & Heinz 2008; Kelly & Merloni 2012; Aversa et al. 2015; Shankar et al.
2004, 2009, 2013, 2020), or from galaxy statistics and scaling relation among galactic and BH properties (e.g., Vika
et al. 2009; Li et al. 2011; Mutlu-Pakdil et al. 2016). At the other end, the stellar BH mass function is largely
unknown, and the most promising messenger to constrain it is constituted by the gravitational wave emission from
coalescing binary BH systems (e.g., Kovetz et al. 2017; Perna et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020; Ding et al. 2020); a
first determination of the primary mass distribution for merging binary BHs has been established by the LIGO/Virgo
collaboration (see Abbott et al. 2021a), although it depends somewhat on some assumptions (see Baxter et al. 2021).
Therefore a theoretical grasp on the stellar BH mass function at different redshifts is of crucial importance.
   In the present work, we provide an ab-initio computation of the stellar BH relic mass function across cosmic times,
by coupling the state-of-the-art stellar and binary evolutionary code SEVN to redshift-dependent galaxy statistics and
empirical scaling relations involving metallicity, star-formation rate and stellar mass. Note that here we mainly consider
the standard, and likely dominant production channel of stellar-mass BHs constituted by isolated single/binary star
evolution, and defer to a future paper the treatment of other formation mechanisms like dynamical effects in dense
star clusters (e.g., Miller & Hamilton 2002; Alexander & Natarajan 2014; Antonini et al. 2019), AGN disks (e.g.,
McKernan et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2019), hierarchical triples (e.g., Kimpson et al. 2016; Fragione et al. 2019) that are
thought to produce corrections in the high-mass tail of the mass function, toward the intermediate-mass BH regime.
   The plan of the paper is straightforward. In Sect. 2 we introduce the theoretical background underlying our
computation of the stellar BH relic mass function; specifically, we highlight the role of quantities related to galaxy
formation (Sect. 2.1) and to stellar evolution (Sect. 2.2), and show how to include the effects of binary BH mergers
(Sect. 2.3). In Sect. 3 we present our results concerning the stellar BH cosmic birthrate, the redshift-dependent stellar
BH relic mass function and relic mass density; we also compare the primary mass distribution for merging BH binaries
with the recent estimates from gravitational wave observations by LIGO/Virgo. In Sect. 4 we critically discuss how
our results depend on the adopted binary stellar evolution code. Moreover, we estimate the effects of binary BH
formation in dense environments like (young) star clusters. We also highlight the relevance of our computations in
providing a light seed distributions for BH growth at high redshift. Finally, in Sect. 5 we summarize our findings and
outlook future developments.
   Throughout this work, we adopt the standard flat ΛCDM cosmology (Planck Collaboration 2020) with rounded
parameter values: matter density ΩM = 0.3, dark energy density ΩΛ = 0.7, baryon density Ωb = 0.05, Hubble
                                                          Stellar BHMF                                                        3

constant H0 = 100 h km s−1 Mpc−1 with h = 0.7. A Kroupa (2001) initial mass function (IMF) in the star mass range
m? ∼ 0.1 − 150 M and a value Z ≈ 0.015 for the solar metallicity are adopted (see Caffau et al. 2011).

                                           2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
  We aim at deriving the stellar BH relic mass function, i.e., the number density of stellar BHs per unit comoving
volume V and remnant mass m• accumulated down to redshift z
                                                              Z ∞
                                    dN•                                     dtz0  dṄ•
                                             (m• | > z) =            dz 0      0
                                                                                           (m• |z 0 ) ,                      (1)
                                 dV d log m•                    z           dz dV d log m•

and the related stellar BH relic mass density

                                                                            dN•
                                                    Z
                                         ρ• (z) =        d log m• m•                 (m• |z) .                               (2)
                                                                         dV d log m•

In the above Eq. (1) the quantity tz is the cosmic time corresponding to redshift z and dṄ• /dV d log m• is the stellar
BH cosmic birthrate, i.e. the production rate of BH of given mass per unit comoving volume. In turn, the latter can
be expressed as
                            dṄ•                             dN•                dṀSFR
                                              Z
                                    (m• |z) = d log Z                  (m• |Z)            (Z|z)                      (3)
                        dV d log m•                     dMSFR d log m•         dV d log Z
where Z is the metallicity and MSFR is the star formed mass. The first and second factors in the integrand are usually
referred to as the stellar and the galactic term, respectively (see Chruslinska & Nelemens 2019; Boco et al. 2021b);
we will now describe each of them in some detail, starting with the latter. The main steps toward the computation of
the stellar BH relic mass function are sketched in Fig. 1.

                                                        2.1. The galactic term
  The galactic term in Eq. (3) represents the cosmic SFR density per unit cosmic volume and metallicity; in other
words, it constitutes the classic ‘Madau’ plot (see Madau & Dickinson 2014 and reference therein) sliced in metallicity
bins, and as such is mainly related to galaxy formation and evolution. It may be estimated in various ways, starting
from different galaxy statistics and empirical scaling laws. We compute it as

             dṀSFR                                 dN                                  dp                 dp
                                 Z                                   Z
                       (Z|z) =       d log ψ ψ              (ψ, z)       d log M?            (M? |ψ, z)         (Z|M? , ψ)   (4)
            dV d log Z                           dV d log ψ                         d log M?            d log Z
where ψ is the SFR and M? the stellar mass of a galaxy. Three ingredients enter into the above expression. The
first is constituted by the redshift-dependent SFR functions dN/dV d log ψ, expressing the number of galaxies per
unit cosmological volume and SFR bin. For these we adopt the determination by Boco et al. (2021, their Fig. 1; for
an analytic Schechter fit see Eq. 2 and Table 1 in Mancuso et al. 2016a) derived from an educated combination of
the dust-corrected UV (e.g., Oesch et al. 2018; Bouwens et al. 2020), IR (e.g., Gruppioni et al. 2020; Zavala et al.
2021), and radio (e.g. Novak 2017; Ocran 2020) luminosity functions, appropriately converted in SFR (see Kennicutt
& Evans 2012).
   The second ingredient is the probability distribution of stellar mass at given SFR and redshift:
                                       
                                       M?                                          ) M? < M?,MS (ψ, z)
                                       
                                       
                     dp                            (
                          (M? |ψ, z) ∝                 [log M? − log M?,MS (ψ, z)]2                             (5)
                 d log M?
                                       M?,MS exp −                                   M? ≥ M?,MS (ψ, z)
                                       
                                                                   2
                                                                 2 σlog M?

where M?,MS (ψ, z) is the observed redshift-dependent galaxy main sequence with log-normal scatter σlog M? ≈ 0.2 dex
(we adopt the determination by Speagle et al 2014; for an anlytic fit, see their Eq. 28). The main sequence is a
relationship between SFR and stellar mass followed by the majority of star-forming galaxies, apart from some outliers
located above the average SFR at given stellar mass (see Daddi et al. 2007; Sargent et al. 2012; Rodighiero et al.
2011, 2015; Speagle et al. 2014; Whitaker et al. 2014; Schreiber et al. 2015; Caputi et al. 2017; Bisigello et al. 2018;
Boogaard et al. 2018). The expression in Eq. (5) holds for an approximately constant SFR history, which is indicated
4                                                   A. Sicilia et al.

both by in-situ galaxy formation scenarios (see Mancuso et al. 2016b; Pantoni et al. 2019; Lapi et al. 2020) and by
observations of ETG progenitors (that have on overage slowly rising star formation history with typical duration of
. 1 Gyr; see Papovich et al. 2011; Smit et al. 2012; Moustakas et al. 2013; Steinhardt et al. 2014; Cassará et al.
2016; Citro et al. 2016) and late-type galaxies (that have on the average slowly declining star formation history over
long timescale of several Gyrs; e.g., see Chiappini et al. 1997; Courteau et al. 2014; Pezzulli & Fraternali 2016; Grisoni
et al. 2017). In this vein, off-main sequence objects can be simply viewed as galaxies caught in an early evolutionary
stage, that are still accumulating their stellar mass (which grows almost linearly with time for a constant SFR), and
are thus found to be preferentially located above the main sequence or, better, to the left of it. As time goes by and
the stellar mass increases, the galaxy moves toward the average main sequence relationship, around which it will spend
most of its lifetime before being quenched due to gas exhaustion or feedback processes.
  The third ingredient is the probability distribution of metallicity at given stellar mass and SFR
                                                          (                                )
                                    dp                        [log Z − log ZFMR (M? , ψ)]2
                                         (Z|M? , ψ) ∝ exp −                 2                                          (6)
                                 d log Z                                 2 σlog Z


that is assumed to be log-normal with mean log ZFMR (M? , ψ) and scatter σlog Z ≈ 0.15 dex provided by the observed
fundamental metallicity relation (we adopt the determination by Mannucci et al. 2011; for an analytic fit, see their Eq.
2). This is a relationship among metallicity, stellar mass and SFR of a galaxy which is found to be closely independent
of redshift at least out to z . 4 (see Mannucci et al. 2010, 2011; Hunt et al. 2016; Curti et al. 2020; Sanders et
al. 2021). In the aforementioned in-situ galaxy formation scenarios (see Pantoni et al. 2019; Lapi et al. 2020; Boco
et al. 2021b), the fundamental metallicity relation naturally stems from: an early, rapid increase of the metallicity
with galactic age, which for a roughly constant star formation history just amounts to the ratio M? /ψ; a late-time
saturation of the metallicity to a mass-dependent value which is determined by the balance among metal dilution,
astration, removal by feedback, and partial restitution by stellar evolution processes and galactic fountains (if present).
  In Fig. 2 we illustrate the galactic term given by Eq. (4). Specifically, we have color-coded the cosmic SFR density
dṀSFR /dV d log Z per unit comoving volume as a function of redshift z and metallicity log Z. Most of the cosmic star
formation occurs around redshift z ∼ 2 − 3 at rather high metallicity, close to solar values. The metallicity at which
most star formation takes place decreases with redshift, but very mildly out to z ∼ 4 − 5. However, we note that at
any redshift there is a long, pronounced tail of star formation occurring at low metallicities, down to 0.01 Z . We
discuss possible variations of the prescriptions entering the galactic term in Sect. 4.1.

                                                  2.2. The stellar term
  The stellar term in Eq. (3) represents the number of BHs formed per unit of star formed mass and remnant mass; as
such, it is related to the evolution of isolated or binary stars, and must be evaluated via detailed simulations of stellar
astrophysics. The stellar term can be split in various contributions

          dN•                     dN?→•                   dN??→•                  X      dN??→••
                     (m• |Z) =                (m• |Z) +                (m• |Z) +                        (m• |Z)        (7)
      dMSFR d log m•           dMSFR d log m•           dMSFR d log m•           i=1,2
                                                                                       dMSFR d log m•,i

the first comes from the evolution of isolated, massive stars that evolve into BHs at the end of their life (hereafter
referred to as ‘single stellar evolution’); the second comes from stars that are originally in binary systems but end
up as an isolated BH because one of the companion has been ejected or destroyed or cannibalized (hereafter ‘failed
BH binaries’); the third comes from stars in binary systems that evolve into a binary BH with primary mass m•,1
and secondary mass m•,2 (hereafter ‘binaries’). All these terms are strongly dependent on metallicity Z, since this
quantity affects the efficiency of the various processes involved in stellar and binary evolution, like mass loss rates,
mass transfers, core-collapse physics, etc. Note that other crucial ingredients implicitly entering the above terms are
the IMF φ(m? ), i.e. the distribution of star masses m? per unit mass formed in stars, and the binary fraction f?? , i.e.
the mass fraction of stars originally born in binary systems; both are rather uncertain quantities. As a reference we
adopt a universal (i.e., equal for every galaxies at any cosmic time) Kroupa (2001) IMF and a binary mass fraction
f?? ≈ 0.5 constant with the star mass m? . We discuss the impact of these choices on our results in Sect. 4.1.
  To compute the stellar term, we exploit the outcomes of the SEVN stellar and binary evolution code, that provides
directly each of the above contributions (see Spera et al. 2019 for details). However, to add some more grasp on the
                                                    Stellar BHMF                                                             5

physics involved, we can provide a handy approximation for the first term referring to isolated stars; this writes as
                            dN?→•                                         dp?→•
                                                            Z
                                        (m• |Z) = (1 − f?? ) dm? φ(m? )           (m• |m? , Z)                       (8)
                         dMSFR d log m•                                  d log m•
where f?? is the binary fraction, φ(m? ) is the IMF, and
                                                        (                                )
                              dp?→•                        [log m• − log m?→• (m? , Z)]2
                                      (m• |m? , Z) ∝ exp −              2                                                  (9)
                             d log m•                                2 σlog m•

is an approximately log-normal distribution centered around the metallicity-dependent relationship m?→• (m? , Z) be-
tween the remnant mass and the initial zero-age main sequence star mass, with dispersion σlog m• ≈ 0.15 dex (see
Spera et al. 2017; Boco et al. 2019). Unfortunately, for the other contributions of the stellar term related to binary
evolution, an analogous analytic approximation is not viable, so one must trust the outputs of the SEVN code. We
discuss the impact of adopting different prescriptions and codes for the computation of the stellar term in Sect. 4.1.
   In Fig. 3 we illustrate the stellar term of Eq. (7), split in its various contributions. Specifically, we have color-
coded the distributions dN• /dMSFR d log m• per unit star mass formed MSFR and BH remnant mass m• . The top
left panel refers to isolated stars evolving in BHs. It is seen that a roughly constant number of remnants with
masses m• ∼ 5 − 30 M is produced per logarithmic BH mass bin at any metallicity. Then there is a peak around
m• ∼ 30 − 60 M , with the larger values applying to metal-poorer conditions, where stellar winds are not powerful
enough to substantially erode the stellar envelope before the final collapse. Finally, the distribution rapidly falls off for
larger m• & 50 − 60 M even at low metallicity1 , due to the presence of pair-instability and pulsational pair-instability
supernovae (see Woosley et al. 2002; Belczynski et al. 2016; Woosley 2017; Spera et al. 2017).
   The top right panel refers to binary stellar systems failing to form a compact binary, and evolving instead into isolated
BHs; this may happen because one of the progenitor star has been ejected far away or destroyed or cannibalized during
binary stellar evolution. The distribution of failed BH binaries differs substantially from single stellar evolution, being
skewed toward more massive BHs, and with an appreciable number of remnants of mass m• ∼ 50 − 160 M produced
especially at low metallicities. Such massive BH remnants are mainly formed when two (non-degenerate) companion
stars merge during a common envelope phase, possibly leaving then a big BH remnant. Finally, note that at high
metallicity a non-negligible fraction of BHs in this channel has formed after the low-mass companion star had been
ejected far away or destroyed by stellar winds and/or supernova explosions (see Spera et al. 2019 for details). The
bottom left panel refers to binary stellar systems evolving into binary BHs; note that the distribution of primary
and secondary BHs in the final configuration have been summed over. Although the overall number of binary BHs
is substantially lower than the single BHs originated from the other two channels, most of them has a very similar
mass spectrum; these remnants have formed from binary stars that underwent minor mass transfer episodes. However,
at low metallicity stellar winds are reduced and hence the mass exchanged or lost during binary evolution may be
significantly larger, implying a more extended tail toward masses m• . 100 M with respect to single stellar evolution.
Finally, the bottom right panel illustrates the sum of all the previous formation channels.

                                                 2.3. Binary BH mergers
  Tight BH binaries may be able to progressively lose their energy via gravitational wave emission and to merge in a
single, more massive BH. The cosmic merging rate of binary BHs can be computed as
       dṄ••→•                             dN??→••→•               dp          dṀSFR
                           Z   Z
                  (m• |z) = dtd d log Z                   (m• |Z)     (td |Z)            (Z|zt−td )  i = 1, 2   (10)
    dV d log m•,i                        dMSFR d log m•,i         dtd         dV d log Z
where zt is the redshift corresponding to a cosmic time t, and td is the time delay between the formation of the
progenitor binary and the merger of the compact binary. The integrand in the expression above is the product of three
terms. The rightmost one is the galactic term that must be computed at a time t − td . The middle one represents the
probability distribution of delay times, possibly dependent on metallicity. The leftmost one is the stellar term that
represents the number of binary stellar systems first evolving in a compact binary and then being able to merge within

  1 Note that adopting an IMF with an upper star mass limit m    ∼ 150 M   avoids dealing with the formation of high-mass remnants
                                                             ?
   m• & 100 M   by direct collapse.
6                                                            A. Sicilia et al.

the Hubble time, per unit of formed star mass and compact remnant mass (primary m•,1 and secondary m•,2 ); this is
a fraction of the third term on the right hand side of Eq. (7). The merger rate is then given by convolution of such a
specific stellar term with the galactic term, weighted by the time delay distribution.
  As a consequence of binary BH mergers, the stellar BH relic mass function may be somewhat distorted, since a
number of low mass BHs are shifted to larger masses. This amounts to apply a merging correction to the original
cosmic birthrate dṄ /dV dm• , that can be computed as follows2

                                                                                         dṄ••→•
                                                    Z m•                                          (m• − m•,1 |z)
    dṄ•,mergcorr            dṄ•            1                     dṄ••→•              dV dm•,2
                  (m• |z) =        (m• |z) +                dm•,1          (m•,1 |z)                                 +
      dV dm•                dV dm•           2        m• /2       dV dm•,1           R m•,1        dṄ••→•
                                                                                      0
                                                                                            dm•,2          (m•,2 |z)
                                                                                                  dV dm•,2
                                                                                                                                        (11)
                                                                       dṄ••→•
                                Z m• /2                                        (m• − m•,2 |z)
                            1                    dṄ••→•              dV dm•,1                       X dṄ••→•
                          +               dm•,2          (m•,2 |z)                                −                (m• |z) ;
                            2    0              dV dm•,2           R∞           dṄ••→•             i=1,2
                                                                                                          dV dm•,i
                                                                    m•,2
                                                                         dm•,1          (m•,1 |z)
                                                                               dV dm•,1
in the positive terms on the right hand side, the normalizations of the rates have been chosen so as to ensure mass
conservation and self-consistency of the integrated merger rates.
  We caveat that additional distorsions of the relic BH mass function may be induced by dynamical effects and/or
hierarchical mergers in dense environments (see Sect. 4.2 for a preliminary discussion), by mass growth due to accretion
in X-ray binaries or in AGN disks, etc.; these processes are expected to be relevant especially at the high mass end,
toward the intermediate-mass BH regime.

                                                               3. RESULTS
  In Fig. 4 we illustrate the stellar BH cosmic birthrate of Eq. (3) as a function of redshift z and remnant mass m• .
Specifically, we have color-coded the birthrate dṄ• /dV d log m• per unit comoving volume V and BH mass m• . At
z ∼ 1 − 4 most of the BHs are formed with a rather flat distribution in log m• for m• ∼ 5 − 50 M , though there is
a non-negligible tail up to m• . 160 M due to stellar mergers (see previous section for details). Moving toward high
redshift z & 4 the mass distribution becomes skewed toward masses m• ∼ 30 − 50 M since these are preferentially
produced in the low metallicity environments, while the tail for m• & 50 M tends to be reduced because of the
decrease in the number density of star-forming galaxies with appreciable SFR.
  In Fig. 5 we illustrate the stellar BH relic mass function dN• /dV d log m• of Eq. (1) as a function of the remnant
mass m• for different redshifts z ∼ 0 − 10. At given redshift, the mass function features a roughly constant behavior
for m• ∼ 5 − 50 M , followed by a quite steep decline for m• & 50 M . Noticeably, there are bumps at around
m• ∼ 20 M , m• ∼ 30 − 50 M and m• ∼ 120 M , that are more pronounced at high redshift (where metallicity is
smaller) and progressively washed out toward the local Universe. Such features reflect regions of higher BH numbers
that are evident in the stellar term of Fig. 3 (in the form of almost vertical darker strips). Specifically, the first two
originate from the detailed shape of the metallicity-dependent BH mass spectrum from single stellar evolution, while
the third one mainly depends on binary evolution effects.
  The mass function increases for decreasing redshift, quite rapidly down to z ∼ 2 − 3 and then more mildly toward
z ∼ 0. Smoothing out minor features, the mass function can be analytically rendered in the range m• ∼ 5 − 160 M
via a Schechter+Gaussian shape (Saunders et al. 1990)
                                             1−α
                                                                      1
                                       
                        dN               m•                                                     2    2
                                 ≃N                e−m• /M• + NG p         e−(log m• −log M•,G ) /2 σG ;              (12)
                    dV d log m•          M•                          2πσG2


the Schechter function has normalization N , low-mass power-law index α and characteristic mass M• , while the
Gaussian (log-normal) has normalization NG , mean M•,G and dispersion σG . The optimal values of these parameters

    2 For the sake of simplicity in Eq. (11) we are neglecting the small amount of mass lost as gravitational waves during the coalescence, since

     we checked that for the purpose of this computation it is practically irrelevant.
                                                    Stellar BHMF                                                          7

have been determined via a Levenberg-Marquardt least-squares fit to the numerical mass function for m• ∼ 5−160 M ;
the results for representative redshifts in the range z ∼ 0 − 10 are reported in Table 1.
   In Fig. 6 we highlight the contribution of the different stellar evolution channels to the stellar BH relic mass function
at z ∼ 0 and at z ∼ 10. In the range m• ∼ 5 − 50 M the single stellar evolution and the failed BH binaries channels
are very similar and dominates over BH binaries. For m• & 50 M the single stellar evolution contribution sharply
dies (due to the mass gap from pair-instability SNe, see Sect. 2.2) and the binary BH channel abruptly decreases
(due to mass loss in common envelope phase, see Sect. 2.2), while the contribution from failed BH binaries dominates
largely. Such a behavior in the relative contributions is basically independent of redshift.
   In Fig. 7 we illustrate the stellar BH relic mass density ρ• (z) of Eq. (2) as a function of redshift z. The mass density
increases quite steeply toward smaller redshifts, changing from values . 105 M Mpc−3 at z ∼ 10 to 107 M Mpc−3
around z ∼ 2 − 3 and then saturating for lower redshiftsR up toR5 × 107 M Mpc−3 at z ∼ 0. The evolution with redshift
                                                            z
plainly follows that of the mass density ρ? = (1 − R) 0 dz 0 d log ψ ψ (dN/dV d log ψ) in stars within galaxies, that
has been computed by integrating the SFR functions and taking into account the recycling fraction R ≈ 0.45; this
corresponds to a local energy density Ω? ≈ 5 × 10−3 , consistent with classic estimates (e.g., Fukugita & Peebles 2004).
On the gross average, we find a ratio of the mass densities ρ• /ρ? ≈ 10%; we have checked that this mainly reflects
the fraction of stars in the Kroupa IMF with mass m? & 20 M originating BH remnants, appropriately lowered by
mass loss in stellar winds and by binary evolution effects. The local density in stellar mass BHs is substantially larger
than that in supermassive BHs with masses M• ∼ 106 − 1010 M , which amounts to ∼ 1 − 2 × 105 M Mpc−3 (see
Shankar et al 2020; see also Kormendy & Ho 2013; Aversa et al. 2015), implying that most of the BH mass in the
local Universe is of stellar origin. The ratio of the local mass densities in supermassive to stellar mass BHs is around
∼ 2 × 10−3 . Finally, we estimate a local BH energy density Ω• ≈ 4 × 10−4 , corresponding to a BH-to-baryon ratio
Ω• /Ωb . 10−2 , i.e. the total mass in stellar BHs amounts to . 1% of the local baryonic matter.
   For the sake of completeness, in Fig. 7 we illustrate the contributions to the BH mass density from different mass
ranges: m• . 20 M , m• ∼ 20 − 50 M and m• & 50 M . As expected from the shape of the mass function, most of
the mass density is contributed by BHs with mass in the interval m• ∼ 20 − 50 M . We also note that the mass density
of BHs with masses m• . 20 M tends to decline more steeply than the total one toward high-redshift, because the
production of such small mass BHs is disfavored in the lower-metallicity environment of high-z galaxies; the opposite
holds for the mass density of BHs with larger masses m• & 50 M .
   In Fig. 8 we evaluate the impact of binary BH mergers on the relic mass function. In the top left panel we have
                                P
color-coded the stellar term i=1,2 dN??→••→• /dMSFR d log m•,i representing the number of binary stellar systems
that first evolve in a BH binary and then are able to merge within the Hubble time, as function of metallicity Z and
BH mass m• . The remnants contributing to this term are actually a sub-sample of those in the binary stellar term of
Fig. 3 (bottom left panel). It is evident that the number of merging binary BHs is a small fraction of the total, while
its distribution lacks the high-mass tail. This is because to form a tight compact binary, the progenitor stars must
have undergone a substantial phase of common envelope, and an ensuing mass loss/envelope ejection (if not, the two
progenitors merge prematurely and a single BH remnant is left). The end-product is a binary which can be sufficiently
tight to merge within an Hubble time, but typically made of BHs that cannot be more massive than m• . 40 − 50 M
(see Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018; Spera et al. 2019).                           P
   In the top right panel we have color-coded the cosmic merging rate i=1,2 dṄ••→• /dV d log m•,i constituting the
destruction term in Eq. (10), as a function of BH mass m• and redshift z. It is seen that most binary BH mergers
occur for redshift z ∼ 1 − 5 in the mass ranges m• ∼ 15 − 40 M and m• ∼ 5 − 8 M . In the bottom panel, we show
the stellar BH relic mass function at z ∼ 0 with and without the correction for binary BH mergers; the solid lines is the
total mass function, while the dashed lines are the contribution from BH binaries. As expected the main changes are
at the high-mass end, where an appreciable number of BHs in binaries is shifted toward larger masses by the merging
process; however, the net effect on the total mass function is minor.
   The contribution to the stellar BH mass function from merging binary BHs can be probed via gravitational wave
observations. Recently, the LIGO/Virgo collaborations (Abbott et al. 2021a; see also Baxter et al. 2021) has estimated
the primary mass distribution for BH binaries that coalesce around z ≈ 0; given the quite small cosmological volume
probed by the current gravitational wave detectors, this approximately corresponds to the merger rate integrated in
a narrow redshift interval ∆z . 0.5. The expectation from this work is illustrated as a red solid line in Fig. 9, and
compared with the estimates by Abbott et al. (2021a; blue shaded area) for a powerlaw+peak model and by Baxter
et al. (2021; orange shaded area) for their astrophysically-motivated model (for both determinations the 68% and
8                                                   A. Sicilia et al.

95% credible intervals are represented with dark and light shades). Our result is in remarkable agreement with these
estimates up to 40 M . However, the observed primary mass distribution declines gently for m• & 40 M out to
m• ∼ 80 − 100 M while our model dies off, since stellar evolution effects hinder the presence of very massive BHs
in coalescing binaries. This occurs mainly for two reasons (see also Sect. 3): the mass gap m• ∼ 50 − 120 M for
the production of BH due to pair-instability and pulsational pair-instability supernovae; (ii) the substantial mass loss
during the common-envelope phase needed to produce a hardened compact binary that can merge within reasonable
timescales. We also stress that such a sharp decline is not dependent on the specific galactic prescriptions nor scatter
in the adopted relations, but it is instead common to any approach including the production and possible merging of
only isolated BH binaries. A viable solution is explored in the next Section.
                                                    4. DISCUSSION
  In this Section we discuss three interesting issues that could potentially affect our results: the impact of the adopted
modeling prescriptions; the dynamical formation channel of BH binaries in dense environment such as star clusters;
the implication of our work in the formation of light (super)massive BH seeds at high redshift.
                                         4.1. Impact of modeling prescriptions
   We warn the reader that the stellar BH relic mass function derived in the present work is somewhat dependent on
the prescriptions entering the galactic and the stellar terms discussed in Sect. 2.1 and 2.2. It is beyond the scope
of this paper to address the issue in detail by exploring the variety of modeling recipes, numerical approaches, and
associated parameter space present in the literature. However, to provide the reader with a grasp of the related impact
on our main results, we discuss the main source of uncertainties and show their impact on the local BH mass function.
   As to the galactic term, the main source of uncertainty is constituted by the adopted main sequence and fundamental
metallicity relationships. To estimate the related degree of uncertainty, we recomputed the galactic term by using in
turn the main sequence relation by Boogaard et al. (2018) in place of our reference by Speagle et al. (2014), and the
fundamental metallicity relation by Hunt et al. (2016) in place of our reference by Mannucci et al. (2011). The results
are illustrated in Fig. 10, and it is seen that the related changes on the stellar BH relic mass function are minor.
   As to the stellar term, the main source of uncertainty is constituted by the numerical treatment in the SEVN code of
stellar winds, of pair-instability and pulsational pair-instability supernovae, of supernova explosions and natal kicks, of
mass transfers and common-envelope phase in binary systems; all these physical processes can have profound impact
on the formation and evolution of isolated or binary stellar BHs (see reviews by Postnov & Yungelson 2006; Ivanova
et al. 2013; Mapelli 2020 and references therein). To estimate the related degree of uncertainty, we recomputed the
stellar term for binaries/failed binaries and the associated relic BH mass function by running a different binary stellar
evolution code. We rely on COSMIC (Breivik et al. 2020) since it constitutes a state-of-the-art, community-developed
software with extensive online documentation on the Github repository (see https://cosmic-popsynth.github.io/), that
upgrades the classic and widespread code BSE (Hurley et al. 2002). As for the parameters regulating mass transfer,
common envelope, tidal evolution, SN explosion and compact-object birth kicks, we keep the same choices adopted for
SEVN, which are described in Spera et al. (2019). The results are presented in Fig. 11. The top left and middle panels
compare the (total) stellar term from the two codes. It is apparent that the main difference involves the distribution
of remnants with mass m• & 50 − 60 M that are associated to compact binaries and especially to failed BH binaries
(i.e., binary stars have coalesced before evolving into two distinct binary BHs; see also Sect. 2.2). Specifically, COSMIC
tends to produce less failed BH binaries than SEVN; this is related to the treatment of the common envelope stage,
which is indeed one of the most uncertain processes in the evolution of binary stars. The bottom panel illustrates the
effects on the relic stellar BH mass function at z ∼ 0. All in all, the differences are minor out to m• ∼ 60 M . At
larger masses, the mass function built from the COSMIC stellar term decreases rapidly, to imply paucity of remnants
with masses m• & 100 M ; contrariwise, the mass function built from the SEVN stellar term is decreasing mildly and
actually features a bump around m• ∼ 150 M , before a cutoff. Anyway, we stress that the major differences occur in
a range where the mass function dN/dm• is already decreasing much faster than m−1       • .
   Among the many parameters entering binary evolution codes, a major role is played by the common envelope
parameter αCE , that quantifies the energy available to unbind the envelope (see Ivanova et al. 2013). As in Spera et
al. (2019), we have set αCE = 5 throughout this paper and in the above comparison between SEVN and COSMIC. To
have a grasp on the impact of such a choice, we have also run COSMIC with αCE = 1, and show in Fig. 11 the resulting
stellar term (top right panel) and BH mass function at z = 0 (bottom panel, dashed lines). The impact of αCE is
rather limited, and mainly affects the high-mass tail of the distribution which is dominated by binary stellar evolution.
                                                     Stellar BHMF                                                            9

  Another crucial parameter entering the stellar term is the binary mass fraction f?? , for which we have assumed a
constant value 0.5. However, this is a rather uncertain quantity, that may well depend on the star mass m? , on the
properties of the host galaxy and/or of the local environment, and even on redshift. In fact, observational constraints
(e.g., Raghavan et al. 2010; Sana et al. 2012; Li et al. 2013; Sota et al. 2014; Dunstall et al. 2015; Luo et al. 2021)
suggest values in the range f?? ≈ 0.3 − 0.7, with a possible increase toward more massive stars. To bracket the effects
of different binary fractions on the stellar term and on the relic BH mass function, in Fig. 12 we compare the results
for our reference f?? = 0.5 to the extreme cases f?? = 0 and f?? = 1. Plainly adopting f?? = 0 (i.e., no stars born in
binaries) cuts the tail of the stellar term and of the BH mass function for m• & 50 − 60 M , that are mostly produced
by binary stellar evolution effects; meanwhile, for smaller masses the mass function is increased by the relatively more
numerous single stars. Contrariwise, the other extreme case f?? = 1 (all stars born in binaries), tend to enhance the
high-mass tail of the mass function and reduce somewhat the number density of BHs with masses m• . 50 − 60 M .
All in all, it is seen that the differences on the mass function are minor, and especially so for f?? & 0.5.
  A final caveat about the IMF is in order. Throughout the paper we have self-consistently adopted as a reference the
Kroupa (2001) IMF, mainly because it constitutes a standard both in the galaxy formation and the stellar evolution
communities (together with the Chabrier 2003 IMF, which anyway would yield almost indistinguishable results) and
because we had prompt availability of stellar evolution simulations based on that. Other classic choices like the Salpeter
(1955), the Kennicutt (1983) and the Scalo (1986) IMF differ somewhat for the relative amount of star formation
occurring below and above 1 M ; such a difference is exacerbated in bottom-heavy IMFs like the one proposed to
apply in massive ellipticals (e.g., van Dokkum & Conroy 2010) or top-heavy IMFs like the one proposed to apply in
the early Universe (e.g., Larson 1998) or in starburst galaxies (e.g., Lacey et al. 2010). It is important to stress that
the IMF enters non-trivially both in the galactic and in the stellar term. In the galactic term, an IMF is needed to
convert the observed galaxy luminosity functions into a statistics based on an intrinsic physical quantity such as the
SFR or the stellar mass; moreover, the determination itself of SFR, stellar masses (hence of the main sequence of
star-forming galaxies), star formation history and metallicity via broadband SED fitting rely on the assumption of a
specific IMF. Typically, at given SFR more top-heavy IMFs are proportionally richer in massive short-lived stars, and
tend to yield a larger restframe UV luminosity/ionizing power, a faster chemical enrichment, and a smaller stellar mass
locked in long-lived stars. In the stellar term, the IMF is plainly an essential ingredient in determining the relative
proportion of compact remnants of different masses (cf. Eq. 8). More top-heavy IMFs tend to produce more massive
stars per unit SFR, thus in principle more massive BH remnants (and a smaller relative amount of neutron stars),
though this is not so straightforward due to mass loss and mass transfers during binary evolution. From the above
considerations one could be led to speculate that precision determinations of the BH mass function in an extended
mass range would constitute a probe for the IMF; however, this plan, at least presently, struggles against the many and
large uncertainties associated with the treatment of binary evolution effects, and against the unexplored degeneracies
with the bunch of poorly constrained parameters of galaxy and stellar evolution.

                                                  4.2. Dynamical channel
   In Fig. 9 we highlighted a possible mismatch at m• & 40 M between the primary mass distribution for merging
BH binaries from isolated binary evolution and the estimates from gravitational wave observations. A viable solution
could be that such large primary masses are produced in binary systems formed within the dense environment of young
stellar clusters, open clusters, globular clusters, or nuclear star clusters (e.g., Di Carlo et al. 2019, 2020; Rodriguez
et al. 2015, 2021; Antonini & Rasio 2016; Kumamoto et al. 2019; Arca-Sedda et al. 2020; Banerjee 2021; Mapelli
et al. 2021; Natarajan 2021). The central density of a star cluster can be so high that the orbits of binary stars are
continuously perturbed by dynamical encounters with other members. Massive BHs m• & 40 M in the pair instability
mass gap can then be originated by hardening of BH binaries via dynamical exchanges in three-body encounters, and
via the merging of massive progenitor stars; in addition, runaway collisions (i.e., a fast sequence of mergers; e.g.,
Portegies Zwart et al. 2004; Giersz et al. 2015; Mapelli 2016) in the densest cores of clusters with low metallicity can
even produce intermediate mass BHs with m• & some 102 M .
   To have a grasp on these effects, we proceed as follows. First, we construct the stellar term of Eq. (7) from the
simulations by Di Carlo et al. (2020), that include dynamical effects in young star clusters. With respect to isolated
conditions, an appreciable number of merging binaries with a primary mass m• & 40 M is originated via dynamical
exchanges, especially at low metallicities. More in detail, BHs with mass m• ∼ 40 − 65 M can be formed (even in the
field) from the evolution of single stars or stars in loose binaries that retain a fraction of their envelope up to their final
10                                                  A. Sicilia et al.

collapse. BHs with mass m• & 65 M can be originated via collisions of massive stars (eased in star clusters because
dynamical encounters can induce fast merging before mass transfer episodes peel-off the primary star). If produced in
the field, BHs from both these channels will remain isolated or locked in loose binaries unable to merge; contrariwise,
in a star cluster they can acquire a new companion via dynamical exchanges and merge by dynamical hardening and
gravitational wave emission. Note that, in contrast, repeated mergers of BHs are suppressed in young star clusters,
because of their low escape velocity.
  Second, we assume that a fraction ffield of the star formation occurs in the field and the complementary fraction
1 − ffield occurs in young star clusters (actually most of the stars are formed in young star clusters, but only a fraction
of these may be subject to dynamical effects before exiting from the cluster or before the star cluster itself dissolves).
Observations (see Goddard et al. 2010; Johnson et al. 2016; Chandar et al. 2017; Adamo et al. 2020) and cluster
formation models (Kruijssen 2012; Pfeffer et al. 2018; Elmegreen 2018; El-Badry et al. 2019; Grudic et al. 2021)
indicate that such a fraction is highly uncertain and possibly dependent on properties like the SFR spatial density and
redshift; in this exploratory computation, we let the fraction ffield vary from 0.2 to 1 (which corresponds to isolated
binaries only), and we split the galactic term of Eq. (4) accordingly. Finally, we combine the stellar and galactic term
so derived to compute the merger rate of Eq. (10) and the expected primary mass distribution.
  The outcome is illustrated in the top panel of Fig. 13 for different values of ffield in the range 0.2 to 1. As expected,
increasing the fraction of SFR in star clusters (i.e., decreasing ffield ) produces a progressively more extended tail
toward high primary masses, to the point that values ffield . 0.8 actually can reconcile the theoretical prediction with
the observational estimates. For completeness, in the bottom panel of Fig. 13 we show how the dynamical evolution
channel affects the relic BH mass function at z ∼ 0. The marked difference with respect to the model with only isolated
binaries is the absence of the drop at around m• ∼ 60 M and of the abrupt cutoff for m• ∼ 150 M . Instead, the
mass function declines smoothly for m• & 60 M . The analytical fits in terms of Eq. (12) for the field+cluster mass
function with ffield = 0.6 at representative redshifts are reported in Table 1.
  Two caveats are in order here. First, in the simulations by Di Carlo et al. (2019, 2020) the treatment of stellar
mergers is based on simplified assumptions: no mass-loss and chemical mixing during the merger; instantaneous
recovery of hydrostatic equilibrium after the merger; rejuvenation of the merger product according to the simple Hurley
et al. (2002) prescriptions. Plainly, these details of the process are quite uncertain, and dedicated hydrodynamical
simulations are required to have a better understanding of the final outcome. Second, in estimating the impact of
the dynamical formation channel we have considered only young star clusters for the sake of simplicity (and because
the prompt availability of in-house dynamical simulations, that are extremely time-demanding to run from scratch).
Globular clusters and nuclear star clusters could also be effective environments to build up massive binary BHs,
since hierarchical mergers are more efficient in very rich and compact stellar systems (e.g., Miller & Hamilton 2002;
Antonini et al. 2019; Mapelli et al. 2021). Hence, including models for globular and nuclear star clusters could allow
to reproduce the observed primary BH mass function with an even larger value of ffield .

                                             4.3. BH seeds at high redshift
   We stress that the stellar BH mass function at high redshift z & 6 derived in the present paper actually provides
a light BH seed distribution in primordial galaxies, as originated by stellar and binary evolution processes. This is
complementary to the seed distributions expected from other classic formation channels. The most relevant are basically
three (see review by Volonteri 2010 and references therein): BHs formed by Pop III stars in metal-free environments
like high-redshift minihalos at z & 20 (e.g., Madau & Rees 2001); runaway stellar collisions in metal-poor nuclear star
clusters (e.g., Devecchi et al. 2012); direct collapse scenarios (e.g., Lodato & Natarajan 2006).
   The light seed distributions from these models (extracted from Fig. 4 of Volonteri 2010) are compared in Fig. 14
with the mass function at z ∼ 6 − 10 from stellar BHs presented in this work. Given the appreciable contribution of the
latter for masses m• . 150 M at redshift z . 10, it will be extremely relevant to include it in numerical simulations,
semi-analytic and semi-empirical models of BH formation and evolution at high redshift.

                                                     5. SUMMARY
  In this work we have provided an ab-initio computation of the relic stellar black hole (BH) mass function across
cosmic times. To this purpose, we have exploited the state-of-the-art stellar and binary evolutionary code SEVN, and
have coupled its outputs with redshift-dependent galaxy statistics and empirical scaling relations involving galaxy
metallicity, star-formation rate and stellar mass. Our main findings are summarized below.
                                                   Stellar BHMF                                                         11

   • The relic mass function dN/dV d log m• as a function of the BH mass m• features a rather flat shape up to
     m• ≈ 50 M and then a log-normal decline for larger masses, while its normalization increases with decreasing
     redshift, quite rapidly down to z ∼ 2 − 3 and then more mildly toward z ∼ 0, see Fig. 5 and Table 1. The local
     stellar BH mass function could be eventually probed via microlensing observations (see Paczynski 1986; for a
     review, Mao 2012).
   • The local relic BH mass function for m• . 50 M is comparably contributed from isolated stars evolving into BH
     and from binary stellar systems ending up in single BH (failed BH binaries), while binary BHs are subdominant;
     for higher masses m• & 50 M the single stellar evolution and binary BH channels abruptly decrease, while the
     failed BH binaries dominates largely. See Fig. 6.
   • The local stellar BH relic mass density amounts to ρ• ≈ 5 × 107 M Mpc−3 , exceeding by more than two orders
     of magnitude that in supermassive BHs; this translates into an energy density parameter Ω• ≈ 5×10−4 , implying
     that the total mass in stellar BHs amounts to . 1% of the local baryonic matter. See Fig. 7.
   • The stellar BH relic mass function can be distorted by binary BH mergers, that can redistribute remnants from
     the low to the high mass range. However, such a reshaping is found to have a minor effect on the mass function
     at the high-mass end. See Fig. 8.
   • The distribution of primary masses for merging BH binaries is found to be in remarkable agreement with the
     recent estimates from gravitational wave observations by LIGO/Virgo out to m• . 40 M . For larger masses,
     the observed distribution declines gently while the theoretical one dies off due to a twofold reason: the mass
     gap from pair-instability and pulsational pair-instability supernovae; and the substantial mass loss during the
     common envelope phase needed to produce a tight BH binary that can merge within the Hubble time. We have
     proposed as a viable solution to consider the dynamical formation of merging BH binaries in dense environment
     like (young) star clusters. See Figs. 9-13 and Table 1.
   • We have discussed the impact on the mass function of adopting different physical prescriptions entering the
     galactic and the stellar term. As for the galactic term, minor differences arise when changing the adopted main
     sequence of star-forming galaxies and the fundamental metallicity relationship. As for the stellar term, the main
     differences concern the high mass end of the mass function, and are due to the numerical treatment of binary
     stellar evolution effects, which are still considerably uncertain even from a theoretical point of view. See Figs.
     11 and 10.
   • The BH mass function derived here can provide a firm theoretical basis for a physically-motivated light seed
     distribution at high redshift; as expected, for masses m• . 150 M and redshifts z . 10 it overcomes complemen-
     tary light seed formation channels, like Pop-III stars, stellar mergers in nuclear star clusters and direct collapse
     scenarios that are aimed to produce larger mass seeds. It will be worth implementing the light seed distribution
     from the present work in semi-analytic and numerical models of (super)massive BH formation and evolution, as
     it can be quite relevant for predictions concerning future gravitational wave observations via Einstein Telescope
     and LISA. See Fig. 14.
  In a future perspective, it would be interesting to exploit the galactic and stellar evolution prescriptions adopted here
to populate a N −body simulation via subhalo clustering abundance matching technique (e.g., Ronconi et al. 2020)
in order to derive a mock catalog encapsulating the three-dimensional spatial distribution of stellar-mass BHs and of
their galactic hosts. Finally, we stress that our work can constitute a starting point to investigate the origin of heavy
seeds and the growth of (super)massive BHs in high-redshift star-forming galaxies, that we will pursue in forthcoming
papers.


                                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
  We thank the referee for a competent and constructive report. We acknowledge C. Baccigalupi and M. Massardi
for interesting discussions and critical reading. This work has been supported by the EU H2020-MSCA-ITN-2019
Project 860744 “BiD4BESt: Big Data applications for black hole Evolution STudies.” AL acknowledges funding from
the PRIN MIUR 2017 prot. 20173ML3WW, “Opening the ALMA window on the cosmic evolution of gas, stars and
supermassive black holes”. UNDC and MM acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council for
the ERC Consolidator grant DEMOBLACK, under contract no. 770017.
12                                                            A. Sicilia et al.

                                                               REFERENCES
Abbott, R., Abbott, T.D., Abraham, S., et al. 2021a, ApJL, 913,         El-Badry, K., Quataert, E., Weisz, D.R., Choksi, N., & Boylan-
   L7                                                                      Kolchin, M. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 4528
Abbott, R., Abbott, T.D., Abraham, S., et al. 2021b, PRX, 11,           eLisa Consortium 2013, white paper (arXiv:1305.5720)
   021053                                                               Elmegreen, B.G. 2018, ApJ, 869, 119
Abbott, R., Abbott, T.D., Abraham, S., et al. 2021c, ApJL, 915,         Farr, W.M., Sravan, N., Cantrell, A., et al. 2011, ApJ, 741, 103
   L5                                                                   Fragione, G., Leigh, N.W.C., Perna, R. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 2825
Abbott, R., Abbott, T.D., Abraham, S., et al. 2020, ApJ, 896, L44       Fukugita, M., & Peebles, P.J.E. 2004, ApJ, 616, 643
Ackley, K., Amati, L., Barbieri, C., et al. 2020, A&A, 643, A113        Giacobbo, N., & Mapelli, M. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 2011
Adamo, A., Zeidler, P., Kruijssen, J.M.D., et al. 2020, Sp. Sc. Rev.,   Giersz, M., Leigh, N., Hypki, A., Lutzgendorf, N., & Askar, A.
   216, 69                                                                 2015, MNRAS, 454, 3150
Alexander, D.M., & Hickox, R.C. 2012, NewAR, 56, 93                     Goddard, Q.E., Bastian, N., & Kennicutt, R.C. 2010, MNRAS,
Alexander, T., & Natarajan, P. 2014, Science, 345, 1330                    405, 857
Antonini, F., Gieles, M., & Gualandris, A. 2019, MNRAS, 486,            Gompertz, B.P., Levan, A.J., Tanvir, N.,R. 2020, ApJ, 895, 58
   5008                                                                 Grisoni, V., Spitoni, E., Matteucci, F., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 472,
Antonini, F., & Rasio, F. A. 2016, ApJ, 831, 187,                          3637
Arca Sedda, M., Mapelli, M., Spera, M., Benacquista, M., &              Grudic, M.Y., Kruijssen, J.M.D., Faucher-Giguere, C.-A., et al.
   Giacobbo, N. 2020, ApJ, 894, 133                                        2021, MNRAS, 506, 3239
Artale, M.C., Tissera, P.B., & Pellizza, L.J. 2015, MNRAS, 448,         Gruppioni, C., Bethermin, M., Loiacono, F., et al. 2020, A&A,
   3071                                                                    643, A8
Aversa, R., Lapi, A., De Zotti, G., Shankar, F., & Danese, L. 2015,     Hunt, L., Dayal, P., Magrini, L., & Ferrara, A. 2016, MNRAS,
   ApJ, 810, 74                                                            463, 2002
Banados, E., Carilli, C., Walter, F., et al. 2018, ApJL, 861, L14       Hurley, J. R., Tout, C. A., & Pols, O. R. 2002, MNRAS, 329, 897
Banerjee, S. 2021, MNRAS, 500, 3002                                     Inoue, Y., Tanaka, Y.T., & Isobe, N. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 4329
Barausse, E., & Lapi, A. 2021, Massive Black Hole Mergers, in           Ivanova, N., Justham, S., Chen, X., et al. 2013, A&ARv, 21, 59
   Handbook of Gravitational Wave Astronomy, eds. C. Bambi,             Justham, S., & Schawinski, K. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1641
   S. Katsanevas and K. Kokkotas (Singapore: Springer)                  Kawamura, S., Ando, M., Seto, N., et al. 2021, PTEP, 2021eA105
Baxter, E.J., Croon, D., McDermott, S.D., & Sakstein, J. 2021,          Kelly, B. C., & Merloni, A. 2012, AdAst, 2012, 7
   ApJL, 916, L16                                                       Kennicutt, R.C., & Evans, N.J. 2012, ARA&A, 50, 531
Belczynski, K., Heger, A., Gladysz, W., et al. 2016, A&A, 594,          Kennicut R. C. Jr, 1983, ApJ, 272, 54
   A97                                                                  Kimpson, T.O., Spera, M., Mapelli, M., Ziosi, B.M. 2016,
Belczynski, K., Benacquista, M.,& Bulik, T. 2010, ApJ, 725, 816            MNRAS, 463
Bisigello, L., Caputi, K. I., Grogin, N., & Koekemoer, A. 2018,         Kormendy, J., & Ho, L.C. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511
   A&A, 609, A82                                                        Kovetz, E.D., Cholis, I., Breysse, P.C., & Kamionkowski, M. 2017,
Boco, L., Lapi, A., Chruslinska, M., et al. 2021b, ApJ, 907, 110           PRD, 95, 103010
Boco, L., Lapi, A., Sicilia, A.M., et al. 2021a, JCAP, 10, 035          Kroupa P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Boco, L., Lapi, & Danese, L. 2020, ApJ, 891, 94                         Kruijssen, J.M.D. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 3008
Boco, L., Lapi, A., Goswami, S., et al. 2019, ApJ, 881, 157             Kumamoto, J., Fujii, M. S., & Tanikawa, A. 2019, MNRAS, 486,
Boogaard, L.A., Brinchmann, J., Bouche, N., et al. 2018, A&A,              3942
   619, A27                                                             Johnson, L.C., Seth, A.C., Dalcanton, J.J., et al. 2016, 827, 33
Bouwens, R. J., Oesch, P. A., Stefanon, M., et al. 2021, AJ, 162,       Lacey, C. G., Baugh, C. M., Frenk, C. S., et al. 2010, MNRAS,
   47                                                                      405, 2
Breivik, K., Coughlin, S., Zevin, M., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, 71         Lapi, A., Pantoni, L., Boco, L., & Danese, L. 2020, ApJ, 897, 81
Caffau, E., Ludwig, H. G., Steffen, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio,       Lapi, A., Pantoni, L., Zanisi, L., et al. 2018, ApJ, 857, 22
   P. 2011, SoPh, 268, 255                                              Lapi, A., Raimundo, S., Aversa, R., et al. 2014, ApJ, 782, 69
Caputi, K. I., Deshmukh, S., Ashby, M. L. N., et al. 2017, ApJ,         Larson, R.B. 1998, MNRAS, 301, 569
   849, 45                                                              Lehmer, B.D., Eufrasio, R.T., Basu-Zych, A., et al. 2021, ApJ,
Cassará, L. P., Maccagni, D., Garilli, B., et al. 2016, A&A, 593,         907, 17
   A9                                                                   Li, C., de Grijs, R., & Deng, L. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1497
Chandar, R., Fall, S.M., Whitmore, B.C., & Mulia, A.J. 2017,            Li, Y.-R., Ho, L. C., & Wang, J.-M. 2011, ApJ, 742, 33
   ApJ, 849, 128                                                        Lodato, G., & Natarajan, P. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 1813
Chabrier, G. 2003, ApJL, 586, L133                                      Luo, F., Zhao, Y.-H., Li, J., Guo, Y.-J., & Liu, C. 2021
Chiappini, C., Matteucci, F., & Gratton, R. 1997, ApJ, 477, 765            (arXiv:2108.11120)
Chruslinska, M., & Nelemans, G. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 5300                  Lupi, A., Haardt, F., Dotti, M., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 299
Citro, A., Pozzetti, L., Moresco, M., & Cimatti, A. 2016, A&A,          Madau, P., & Dickinson, M. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 415
   592, A19                                                             Madau, P., Haardt, F., & Dotti, M. 2014, ApJ, 784, L38
Courteau, S., Cappellari, M., de Jong, R. S., et al. 2014, RvMP,        Madau, P., & Fragos, T. 2017, ApJ, 840, 39
   86, 47                                                               Madau P., & Rees, M.J. 2001, ApJL, 551, L27
Curti, M., Mannucci, F., Cresci, G., & Maiolino, R. 2020, MNRAS,        Mancuso, C., Lapi, A., Shi, J., et al. 2016a, ApJ, 823, 128
   491, 944                                                             Mancuso, C., Lapi, A., Shi, J., et al. 2016b, ApJ, 833, 152
Daddi, E., Alexander, D. M., Dickinson, M., et al. 2007, ApJ, 670,      Mannucci, F., Cresci, G., Maiolino, R., Marconi, A., & Gnerucci,
   173                                                                     A. 2010, MNRAS, 408, 2115
Das, A., Schleicher, D.R.G., Leigh, N.W.C., & Boekholt, T.C.N.          Mannucci, F., Salvaterra, R., & Campisi, M. A. 2011, MNRAS,
   2021, MNRAS, 503, 1051                                                  414, 1263
Devecchi, B., Volonteri, M., Rossi, E.M., Colpi, M., & Portegies        Mao, S. 2012, RAA, 12, 947
   Zwart, S. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1465                                     Mayer, L., & Bonoli, S. 2019, RPPh, 82, 6901
Di Carlo, Ugo N., Mapelli, Michela, Giacobbo, N., et al. 2020,          Mapelli, M., Santoliquido, F., Bouffanais, Y., et al. 2021, MNRAS,
   MNRAS, 498, 495                                                         505, 339
Di Carlo, U.N., Giacobbo, N, Mapelli, M., et al. 2019, MNRAS,           Mapelli, M. 2020, Fr. Astron. Sp. Sci., 7, 38
   487, 2947                                                            Mapelli, M. 2016, MNRAS, 459, 3432
Ding, X., Liao, K., Biesiada, M., & Zhu, Z.-H. 2020, ApJ, 891, 76       Mapelli, M., Ripamonti, E., Zampieri, L., Colpi, M., & Bressan,
Dominik, M., Berti, E., O’Shaughnessy, R., et al. 2015, ApJ,               A. 2010, MNRAS, 408, 234
   806,263                                                              McKernan, B., Ford, K.E.S., Lyra, W., & Perets, H.B. 2012,
Dunstall, P. R., Dufton, P. L., Sana, H., et al. 2015, A&A, 580,           MNRAS, 425, 460
   A93                                                                  Merloni, A., & Heinz, S. 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1011
                                                           Stellar BHMF                                                                 13

Miller, M.C., & Hamilton, D.P. 2002, ApJ, 576, 894                    Sanders, R. L., Shapley, A. E., Jones, T., et al. 2021, ApJ, 914, 19
Mirabel, I.F., Dijkstra, M., Laurent, P., Loeb, A., & Pritchard, J.   Sargent, M. T., Bthermin, M., Daddi, E., & Elbaz, D. 2012, ApJL,
   R. 2011, A&A, 528, A149                                               747, L31
Mortlock, D. J., Warren, S. J., Venemans, B. P., et al. 2011,         Shankar, F., Allevato, V., Bernardi, M., et al. 2020, NatAs, 4, 282
   Nature, 474, 616                                                   Shankar, F., Bernardi, M., Sheth, R.K., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 460,
Moustakas, J., Coil, A. L., Aird, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 767, 50          3119
Mutlu-Pakdil, B., Seigar, M.S., & Davis, B.L. 2016, ApJ, 830,117      Shankar, F., Weinberg, D.H., & Miralda-Escude, J. 2013, MNRAS,
Natarajan, P. 2021, MNRAS, 501, 1413                                     428, 421
Novak, M., Smolcic, V., Delhaize, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 602, 5        Shankar, F., Weinberg, D. H., & Miralda-Escude, J. 2009, ApJ,
Ocran, E. F., Taylor, A. R., Vaccari, M., et al. 2021, MNRAS,            690, 20
   500, 4685                                                          Shankar, F., Salucci, P., Granato, G. L., de Zotti, G., & Danese,
Oesch, P. A., Bouwens, R. J., Illingworth, G. D., Labbé, I., &          L. 2004, MNRAS, 354, 1020
   Stefanon, M. 2018, ApJ, 855, 105                                   Scalo J. M., 1986, Fundamentals Cosmic Phys., 11, 1
Paczynski, B. 1986, ApJ, 304, 1
                                                                      Schreiber, C., Pannella, M., Elbaz, D., et al. 2015, A&A, 575, 74
Pacucci, F., Natarajan, P., Volonteri, M., Cappelluti, N., & Urry,
                                                                      Small, T. A., & Blandford, R. D. 1992, MNRAS, 259, 725
   C.M. 2017, ApJ, 850, L42
Pantoni, L., Lapi, A., Massardi, M., Goswami, S., & Danese, L.        Smit, R., Bouwens, R. J., Franx, M., et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, 14
   2019, ApJ, 880, 129                                                Soltan, A. 1982, MNRAS, 200, 115
Papovich, C., Finkelstein, S. L., Ferguson, H. C., Lotz, J. M., &     Sota, A., Maız Apellaniz, J., Morrell, N. I., et al. 2014, ApJS, 211,
   Giavalisco, M. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1123                                 10
Paynter, J., Webster, R., & Thrane, E. 2021, Nature Astron., 5,       Speagle, J. S., Steinhardt, C. L., Capak, P. L., & Silverman, J.
   560                                                                   2014, ApJS, 214, 15
Perna, R., Wang, Y.-H., Farr, W.M., Leigh, N., & Cantiello, M.        Spera, M., Mapelli, M., Giacobbo, N., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 485,
   2019, ApJL, 878, L1                                                   889
Pezzulli, G., & Fraternali, F. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 2308                 Spera, M., & Mapelli, M. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4739
Pfeffer, J., Kruijssen, J.M.D., Crain, R.A., & Bastian, N. 2018,      Spera, M., Mapelli, M., & Bressan, A. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 4086
   MNRAS, 475, 4309                                                   Steinhardt, C. L., Speagle, J. S., & Capak, P. 2014, ApJL, 791,
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al. 2020, A&A,         L25
   641, A6                                                            Tang, S.-P., Wang, H., Wang, Y.-Z., et al. 2020, ApJ, 892, 56
Portegies Zwart, S.F., Baumgardt, H., Hut, P., Makino, J.,            van Dokkum, P., & Conroy, C., 2010, Nature, 468, 940
   McMillan, S.L.W. 2004, Nature, 428, 724
                                                                      Venemans, B. P., Walter, F., Decarli, R., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845,
Postnov, K.A., & Yungelson, L.R. 2006, Liv. Rev. Rel., 9, 6
                                                                        154
Raghavan, D., McAlister, H. A., Henry, T. J., et al. 2010, ApJS,
   190, 1                                                             Vika, M., Driver, S. P., Graham, A. W., & Liske, J. 2009, MNRAS,
Rodighiero, G., Brusa, M, Daddi, E., et al. 2015, ApJL, 800, L10        400, 1451
Rodighiero, G., Daddi, E., Baronchelli, I., et al. 2011, ApJL, 739,   Volonteri, M., Silk, J., & Dubus, G. 2015, ApJ, 804, 148
   L40                                                                Volonteri, M. 2010, A&ARv, 18, 279
Rodriguez, C.L., Kremer, K., Chatterjee, S., et al. 2021, RNAAS,      Whitaker, K. E., Franx, M., Leja, J., et al. 2014, ApJ, 795, 104
   5, 19                                                              Woosley, S. E., Heger, A., & Weaver, T. A. 2002, RvMP, 74, 1015
Rodriguez, C.L., Morscher, M., Pattabiraman, B., et al. 2015,         Woosley, S. E. 2017, ApJ, 836, 244
   PhRvL, 115e1101                                                    Yang, Y., Bartos, I., Gayathri, V., et al. 2019, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161                                     123, 181101
Salucci, P., Szuszkiewicz, E., Monaco, P., & Danese, L. 1999,         Yu, Q., & Lu, Y. 2004, ApJ, 602, 603
   MNRAS, 307, 637                                                    Zavala, J. A., Casey, C. M., Manning, S. M., et al. 2021, ApJ, 909,
Sana, H., de Mink, S. E., de Koter, A., et al. 2012, Science, 337,      165
   444                                                                Zhu, P., Ho, L.C., & Gao, H. 2021, ApJ, 907, 6
14                                                     A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 1. Schematics showing the main steps to compute the stellar BH relic mass function (Eq. 1). This is obtained by
integration over redshift of the BH cosmic birthrate (Eq. 3), which is in turn determined via the convolution of the galactic and
the stellar terms. The galactic term (Eq. 4) is computed by convolving the galaxy statistics (based on the SFR function) with
the metallicity distribution of a galaxy at given SFR and stellar mass (assumed as a log-normal shape around the fundamental
metallicity relation; see Eq. 6) and with the stellar mass distribution of a galaxy at given SFR and redshift (built from the
redshift-dependent main sequence of star-forming galaxies; see Eq. 5). The stellar term (Eq. 7) is computed from the stellar and
binary evolutionary code SEVN by summing up, for a given IMF, the probabilities per unit star-formed mass that: (i) a single
star evolves into a BH remnant (single stellar evolution); (ii) a binary stellar system evolves into a single BH remnant or two
BHs no longer bounded (failed binaries); (iii) a binary stellar system evolves into a binary BH (binaries), that may eventually
coealesce into a single BH via emission of gravitational waves.
                                                      Stellar BHMF                                                             15




Figure 2. The galactic term dṀ? /dV d log Z of Eq. (4) expressing the amount of SFR (color-coded) per unit comoving volume
as a function of redshift z (on x-axis) and of metallicity Z (on y-axis). The black horizontal line highlights the solar value Z .
16                                                      A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 3. The stellar term dN• /dMSFR d log m• of Eq. (7) expressing the number of BHs per unit star-formed mass (color-
coded) as a function of BH mass m• (on x-axis) and of metallicity Z (on y-axis). Different panels refer to: isolated stars evolving
into single BH (top left); binary stars failing to form a compact binary and instead originating a single BH (top right); binary
stars evolving in binary BHs (bottom left); summation of these contributions (bottom right).
                                                   Stellar BHMF                                                          17




Figure 4. The stellar BH cosmic birthrate dṄ /dV d log m• (color-coded) as a function of redshift z (on x-axis) and BH mass
m• (on y-axis).
18                                                 A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 5. The stellar BH relic mass function dN/dV d log m• as a function of the BH mass m• at different redshifts z ∼ 0
(cyan), z ∼ 1 (orange), z ∼ 2 (green), z ∼ 4 (red), z ∼ 6 (violet), z ∼ 8 (brown) and z ∼ 10 (pink).
                                                      Stellar BHMF                                                            19




Figure 6. The stellar BH relic mass function dN/dV d log m• as a function of the BH mass m• at redshift z ∼ 0 (blue) and
z ∼ 10 (green), with highlighted the contribution to the total (solid lines) by single BHs formed from isolated stars (dot-dashed
lines), failed BH binaries (dashed lines), and BH binaries (dotted lines).
20                                                      A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 7. The relic density ρ• in stellar mass BHs as a function of redshift z (solid blue line); contribution from different
BH mass ranges are also displayed: m• /M . 20 (dotted), 20 . m• /M . 50 (dashed) and m• /M & 50 (dot-dashed). For
reference, the stellar mass density in galaxies is also illustrated (orange line). Moreover, the observational estimate of the mass
density in supermassive BHs with M• ∼ 106 − 1010 M at z ∼ 0 is shown (Shankar et al. 2020; red shaded area in the bottom
left corner).
                                                     Stellar BHMF                                                           21




Figure
P         8.    Impact of binary BH mergers on the stellar BH relic mass function.               Top left panel: stellar term
  i=1,2 dN??→••→• /dMSFR d log m•,i representing the number of binary stellar systems that first evolve in a BH binary and then
are able to merge
               P within the Hubble time (color-coded), as function of metallicity Z and BH mass m• . Top right panel: cosmic
merging rate     i=1,2 dṄ••→• /dV d log m•,i (color-coded; see Eq. 10) as a function of BH mass m• and redshift z. Bottom
panel: stellar BH relic mass function dN• /dV d log m• as a function of BH mass m• at redshift z ∼ 0, without (red lines) and
with (green line) correction for binary BH merging effects; solid lines refer to the total mass function and dashed line to the
contribution from binary BHs.
22                                                     A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 9. The BH mass function of merging BH binaries as a function of primary BH mass at z ≈ 0. The outcome of this
work is illustrated by the red solid line. Estimates from the analysis of gravitational wave observations by Abbott et al. (2021a)
and Baxter et al. (2021) are reported as blue and orange shaded areas, respectively (for both determinations the 68% and 95%
credible intervals are represented with dark and light shades).
                                                     Stellar BHMF                                                           23




Figure 10. Impact on the BH mass function of different prescriptions for the galactic term (see Sect. 4.1). Top panels: the
galactic term of Eq. (4) when assuming our reference Speagle (2014) main-sequence and Mannucci et al. (2011) fundamental
metallicity relation (left), when changing the fundamental metallicity relation to that by Hunt et al. (2016; middle), and when
changing the main sequence relation to that by Boogaard et al. (2018; right). Bottom panel: the relic stellar BH mass function
at redshift z ∼ 0 for the three cases just described above.
24                                                     A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 11. Impact on the BH mass function of different codes and prescriptions for the computation of the stellar term (see
Sect. 4.1). Top panels: the (total) stellar term of Eq. (7) from the SEVN (left) and the COSMIC (middle) binary stellar evolution
codes assuming a common envelope parameter αCE = 5 (see Sect. 4.1); results with COSMIC (right) for αCE = 1 are also shown.
Bottom panel: the relic stellar BH mass function at redshift z ∼ 0 from the SEVN (solid blue line) and the COSMIC (dotted blue
line) with αCE = 5, and from COSMIC (dashed blue line) with αCE = 1; the contribution from binaries is also highlighted (green
lines).
                                                      Stellar BHMF                                                              25




Figure 12. Impact of the binary fraction f?? on our results (see Sect. 4.1). Top panels: the (total) stellar term of Eq. (7) for
f?? = 0 (left; no stars born in binaries), 0.5 (middle; our fiducial case) and 1 (right; all stars born in binaries). Bottom panel:
the relic stellar BH mass function at redshift z ∼ 0 for f?? = 0 (dotted line), 0.5 (solid) and 1 (dashed).
26                                                      A. Sicilia et al.




Figure 13. Top panel: impact of the dynamical formation channel on the BH primary mass distribution of merging BH binaries
z ≈ 0, computed from the simulations for young open star clusters by Di Carlo et al. (2020, see Section 4.2 for details). Lines
refers to different fraction of star formation occurring in the field ffield ≈ 1 (solid; only isolated binaries), 0.8 (dashed), 0.6
(dot-dashed), 0.4 (dot-dot-dashed) and 0.2 (dotted). Estimates from the analysis of gravitational wave observations by Abbott
et al. (2021a) and Baxter et al. (2021) are reported as blue and orange shaded areas, respectively (for both determination the
68% and 95% credible intervals are represented with dark and light shades). Bottom panel: impact of the dynamical formation
channel on the relic BH mass function at z ∼ 0. Dotted lines refer to the contribution from star clusters and solid lines to
the total (field+star clusters) BH mass function. Color-code refers to different fraction of star formation occurring in the field
ffield ≈ 1 (red), 0.8 (blue), 0.6 (green), 0.4 (purple) and 0.2 (yellow).
                                                    Stellar BHMF                                                          27




Figure 14. The light seed distribution at redshift z ∼ 10 (solid), 8 (dot-dashed), 6 (dashed) and 0 (dotted) from the stellar
BH mass function of this work is compared with that expected from pop-III remnants (orange line), runaway stellar collisions
in nuclear star clusters (green line), and direct collapse scenarios (blue line); see discussion in Sect. 4.3.
     28                                                             A. Sicilia et al.

                                         Table 1. Fits to stellar BH relic mass function via Eq. (12).

                                Field, ffield = 1                                               Field+Cluster, ffield = 0.6


 z         log N       log M•     α        log NG          log M•,G    σG      log N        log M•     α      log NG          log M•,G    σG
              −3                                  −3                               −3                                −3
          [Mpc     ]   [M ]                [Mpc        ]    [M ]              [Mpc      ]   [M ]              [Mpc        ]    [M ]
 0         5.623       0.607    -3.781      2.413           2.021     0.052     6.078       0.704    -2.717    3.496           1.808     0.1846
 1         5.429       0.609    -3.859      2.309           2.023     0.051     5.887       0.709    -2.785    3.304           1.843      0.173
 2         5.107       0.612    -3.914      2.064           2.024     0.051     5.592       0.713    -2.823    3.008           1.866      0.165
 4         4.344       0.634    -3.902      1.419           2.037     0.049     4.796       0.747    -2.782    2.101           1.952      0.132
 6         3.614       0.659    -3.866      0.806           2.054     0.045     4.112       0.785    -2.718    1.359           2.012      0.107
 8         2.894       0.676    -3.868      0.197           2.066     0.043     3.457       0.816    -2.660    0.685           2.046      0.091
 10        2.305       0.680    -3.884      -0.344          2.072     0.042     2.897       0.831    -2.623    0.113           2.059     0.0841
Note—Fits valid in the range m• ∼ 5 − 160 M . Typical relative uncertainties on the parameters are . 10%, and typical values of
 the reduced χ2r . 1 are found. The results for ffield = 0.6 are based on the simulations by Di Carlo et al. (2019, 2020) for young
 open star clusters.
