                                               The Excursion Set Theory of Halo Mass Functions, Halo
                                                                     Clustering, and Halo Growth

                                                                                 Andrew R. Zentner ∗
                                                                     Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics,
                                                                   Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
                                                                           & The Enrico Fermi Institute,




arXiv:astro-ph/0611454v1 14 Nov 2006
                                                                            The University of Chicago,
                                                                                Chicago, IL, 60605 USA;
                                                                                zentner@kicp.uchicago.edu

                                                  I review the excursion set theory with particular attention toward applications to
                                                cold dark matter halo formation and growth, halo abundance, and halo clustering.
                                                After a brief introduction to notation and conventions, I begin by recounting the
                                                heuristic argument leading to the mass function of bound objects given by Press
                                                & Schechter. I then review the more formal derivation of the Press-Schechter halo
                                                mass function that makes use of excursion sets of the density field. The excursion
                                                set formalism is powerful and can be applied to numerous other problems. I review
                                                the excursion set formalism for describing both halo clustering and bias and the
                                                properties of void regions. As one of the most enduring legacies of the excursion
                                                set approach and one of its most common applications, I spend considerable time
                                                reviewing the excursion set theory of halo growth. This section of the review culmi-
                                                nates with the description of two Monte Carlo methods for generating ensembles of
                                                halo mass accretion histories. In the last section, I emphasize that the standard ex-
                                                cursion set approach is the result of several simplifying assumptions. Dropping these
                                                assumptions can lead to more faithful predictions and open excursion set theory to
                                                new applications. One such assumption is that the height of the barriers that define
                                                collapsed objects is a constant function of scale. I illustrate the implementation of
                                                the excursion set approach for barriers of arbitrary shape. One such application is
                                                the now well-known improvement of the excursion set mass function derived from

                                       ∗
                                           National Science Foundation Fellow
                                                                                                2

      the “moving” barrier for ellipsoidal collapse. I also emphasize that the statement
      that halo accretion histories are independent of halo environment in the excursion
      set approach is not a general prediction of the theory. It is a simplifying assumption.
      I review the method for constructing correlated random walks of the density field in
      the more general case. I construct a simple toy model to illustrate that excursion set
      theory (with a constant barrier height) makes a simple and general prediction for the
      relation between halo accretion histories and the large-scale environments of halos:
      regions of high density preferentially contain late-forming halos and conversely for
      regions of low density. I conclude with a brief discussion of the importance of this
      prediction relative to recent numerical studies of the environmental dependence of
      halo properties.



                                    I.   INTRODUCTION


  In the standard, hierarchical, cold dark matter (CDM) paradigm of cosmological struc-
ture formation, galaxy formation begins with the gravitational collapse of overdense regions
into bound, virialized halos of dark matter (DM). The average density of dark matter out-
weighs that of baryonic matter by roughly six to one. Bound in the potential wells of dark
matter halos, baryons proceed to cool, condense, and form galaxies. Understanding the
fundamental properties and abundances of these dark matter halos is the first, necessary
step in understanding the properties of galaxies.
  In this manuscript, I review the excursion set (also referred to as “extended Press-
Schechter”) approach to dark matter halo formation and halo clustering. I begin with
some preliminaries that serve to define my notation and several common conventions in § II.
I review the heuristic argument that Press & Schechter [1] used to derive their analytic
mass function in § III. In this section I also draw attention to the most obvious weakness
of the Press-Schechter argument, often referred to as the cloud-in-cloud problem. In § IV I
review the theory of excursion sets of the density contrast field and the manner in which the
excursion set theory solves the cloud-in-cloud problem. The standard excursion set theory
then yields a halo mass function identical to the Press-Schechter proposal.
  The excursion set approach is very powerful and yields a great deal of insight into nu-
merous aspects of halo formation and halo clustering. Following the mass function, one of
                                                                                             3

the most immediate applications of the excursion set approach is to predict the clustering
properties of dark matter halos relative to the dark matter. I review the issue of halo bias in
the context of the excursion set theory in § V. The bias relation derived in § V was derived
prior to widespread use of excursion set theory, but this section also partially serves as a
warm-up for the more complex arguments that follow. In § VI, I summarize the excursion
set theory of the void population. The content of § V and § VI contain some redundant
information, but my intention is that repetition of the basic arguments in these sections will
reinforce the logic and methods of the excursion set approach.
   In § VII, I review excursion set predictions for halo conditional mass functions, halo
accretion rates, and halo formation times. The culmination of this review is the predominant
algorithm for generating Monte Carlo merger histories on a halo-by-halo basis using the
excursion set theory. This algorithm, refined most recently by Somerville & Kolatt [2] and
Cole et al. [3] to similar effect, is the subject of § VIII.
   Recent advancement in both theoretical methods and observational data have emphasized
the weaknesses of the simplest implementation of the excursion set model. Nevertheless, the
basic idea of the excursion set model is extremely valuable because it provides a toolbox for
making quick estimates for numerous halo and galaxy properties. In addition, and perhaps
more importantly, the excursion set approach remains one of the principle frameworks for
qualitative reasoning and understanding of the complex results of direct, cosmological, nu-
merical simulations. The algorithm for generating merger trees is one of the most widely
used aspects of excursion set theory and is likely to remain one of the primary legacies of
excursion set theory. These excursion set halo merger trees form the basis of countless semi-
analytic explorations of the physical processes involved in galaxy formation (examples are
Refs. [3, 4, 5]). The excursion set halo merger trees are considerably less costly to produce
than direct N-body simulation, so they continue to be used to make general points (there
are many examples, but an elegant recent example is Ref. [6]) and to study the effects of
varying cosmological parameters (e.g., Ref. [7]). Moreover, excursion set merger histories
are also the basis of many models that aim to expand upon simulation results, either by
extending results beyond the resolution of current simulations or building statistically-large
halo samples in regimes where simulations have not, by modeling nonlinear dynamics in
simplified ways (e.g., Refs. [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]).
   The simplest implementation of the excursion set theory, which is the primary focus
                                                                                             4

of these lectures, is certainly not the only possible implementation of the excursion set
approach. Excursion set theory can be modified to approximate numerous physical effects
that are ignored in the derivations of the most basic set of equations. I address extensions of
the excursion set models and proposed improvements in the final section of this review, § IX.
This section highlights areas where excursion set theory can be expanded and points toward
the principle references where these extensions have been developed. I focus primarily on
generalized forms for the barrier shape and excursion sets of correlated random walks. An
interesting aspect of this section is the calculation of a general excursion set prediction for
the dependence of halo formation times on the large-scale environments of halos. I close with
a mention of the PINOCCHIO algorithm, developed by P. Monaco and collaborators primarily
in Refs. [14, 15, 16], which makes use of Lagrangian perturbation theory together with some
of the ideas of the excursion set approach to produce, of many things, halo merger histories.
   My primary aims are to present a relatively concise, pedagogical review of the basic logic
and techniques of excursion set theory that can be used as a springboard to new studies and
to collect the most important results of excursion set theory into a single manuscript, with
a single notation. As such, the reference list contained in this manuscript is by no means
an exhaustive review of the literature on analytic halo formation or even the excursion set
approach. Many important contributions have been omitted in the interest of brevity and
to limit the scope of the lectures. However, the references should be sufficient to develop the
fundamental logic of the excursion set approach and the basic tools needed to extend this
approach to new problems. As a minimal approach, the basic development of the excursion
set approach can be followed through the series of papers by Bardeen et al. [17], Bond et
al. [18], Lacey & Cole [19, 20], Sheth & Lemson [21], and Somerville & Kolatt [2]. The various
manuscripts contained in the collection edited by Wax [22] are an extremely valuable resource
for understanding stochastic processes and deriving many of the basic results of excursion
set theory (including results not contained in this review). Of the articles reprinted in the
Wax collection, those by Chandrasekhar [23], and Rice [24, 25] are probably of the most
immediate interest.
                                                                                                             5

                           II.   NOTATION AND CONVENTIONS


   In the following, I consider fluctuations in the density field ρ(~x) described by the density
contrast δ(~x) ≡ [ρ(~x) − ρM ]/ρM , where ρM is the mean mass density in the universe and ~x
is a comoving spatial coordinate. In the standard paradigm, the universe is endowed with
primordial density fluctuations during an epoch of cosmological inflation and the primordial
density contrast is a statistically homogeneous and isotropic Gaussian random field. This
means that the joint probability distribution of the density contrast at a set of points in
space is given by a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Homogeneity requires that the mean
hδ(~x)i, of the distribution and the two-point function hδ(~x1 )δ(~x2 )i ≡ ξ(~x1 , ~x2 ) be invariant
under translations. The two-point function is then a function only of the separation vector
between two points, ξ(~x1 , ~x2 ) = ξ(~x1 − ~x2 ). Isotropy requires that ξ(~x) is invariant under
rotations as well, so the two-point correlation function is only a function of the distance
between two points, ξ(~x1 , ~x2 ) = ξ(|~x1 − ~x2 |).
   The Fourier transform of the density contrast is given by the convention
                                                  Z
                                                                    ~
                                        δ(~k) =       d3 x δ(~x)eik·~x                                     (1)

with the inverse transform

                                                1
                                                      Z
                                                                       ~
                                   δ(~x) =                d3 k δ(~k)e−ik·~x .                              (2)
                                              (2π)3

Notice that the δ(~k) have dimensions of volume and that for a real-valued field δ(~x), the
Fourier coefficients obey the relation δ(−~k) = δ ∗ (~k). We have implicitly assumed that there
is some very large cut-off scale L ≡ V 1/3 that renders the integral                |δ(~x)|d3 x finite and that
                                                                                R

this scale is much larger than any other scale of interest so that it plays no meaningful role.
Using these conventions, one can compute the two-point function ξ(~r) ≡ hδ(~x)δ(~x + ~r)i in
terms of the Fourier coefficients, where the average is taken over all space. The two-point
function is a function only of the amplitude of ~r due to isotropy, and the result is

                                    1                             sin(kr)
                                          Z
                             ξ(r) = 2         k 3 V −1 |δ(k)|2            d ln k.                          (3)
                                   2π                                kr

The correlation function is the Fourier transform of the power spectrum

                                         P (k) ≡ V −1 h|δ(k)|2 i,                                          (4)
                                                                                                 6

where the average is over an ensemble of universes with the same statistical properties. The
power spectrum has dimensions of volume and so a quantity that lends itself more easily to
direct interpretation is the dimensionless combination

                                    ∆2 (k) ≡ k 3 P (k)/2π 2.                                   (5)

The correlation function hδ 2 (~x)i is simply the mass variance. From Eq. (3), ∆2 (k) is the
contribution to the mass variance from modes in a logarithmic interval in wavenumber, so
that ∆2 (k) ∼ 1 indicates order unity fluctuations in density on scales of order ∼ k.
   In the standard, cold dark matter (CDM) model, ∆2 (k) increases with wavenumber (at
least until some exceedingly small scale determined by the physics of the production of the
CDM in the early universe), but we observe the density field smoothed with some resolution.
Therefore, a quantity of physical interest is the density field smoothed on a particular scale
RW ,
                                         Z
                          δ(~x; RW ) ≡       d3 x′ W (|~x′ − ~x|; RW )δ(~x′ )                  (6)

The function W (x; RW ) is the window function that weights the density field in a manner
that is relevant for the particular application. According to the convention used in Eq. (6),
the window function (sometimes called filter function) has units of inverse volume by di-
mensional arguments. It is also useful to think of a window as having a particular window
volume VW . The window volume can be obtained operationally by normalizing W (x) such
that it has a maximum value of unity and is dimensionless. Call this new dimensionless
window function W ′ (x). The volume is given by integrating to give VW =            d3 xW ′ (x). In
                                                                                R

this way, one thinks of the window weighting points in the space by different amounts. It
should be clear that W (x) = W ′ (x)/VW . Roughly speaking, the smoothed field is the av-
                                                             3
erage of the density fluctuation in a region of volume VW ∼ RW . The Fourier transform of
the smoothed field is
                                 δ(~k; RW ) ≡ W (~k; RW )δ(~k),                                (7)

where W (~k; RW ) is the Fourier transform of the window function.
   The most natural choice of window function is probably a simple sphere in real space.
The window function is then
                                                    3
                                                  4πR3W
                                                          (x ≤ RW )
                              W (x; RW ) =                            .                        (8)
                                                  0       (x > RW )
                                                                                           7

In this case, the smoothed field is the average density in spheres of radius RW about point
                                        3
~x. The window volume is simply VW = 4πRW /3. However, this choice of window has the
undesirable property that the sharp transition in configuration space leads to power on all
scales in Fourier space. Therefore, it is often convenient to smooth the boundary in real
space. As I discuss below, it is often convenient to introduce particular window functions
to ensure that the smoothed field has particular properties. The three most commonly used
window functions are the real-space tophat window of Eq. (8), with Fourier transform
                                      3[sin(kRRW ) − kRW cos(kRW )]
                       W (k; RW ) =                                 ,                     (9)
                                                (kRW )3
the Fourier-space tophat window, and the Gaussian window. The Fourier-space tophat is
defined in Fourier space as
                                                              −1
                                                      1 (k ≤ RW  )
                                 W (k; RW ) =                        ,                  (10)
                                                              −1
                                                      0 (k > RW  )
and is
                                                 −1       −1        −1
                                     1 (sin(xRW     ) − xRW   cos(xRW  ))
                    W (x; RW ) =     2 3                 −1 3                            (11)
                                  2π RW               (xRW )
in real space. A disadvantage of this window is that it does not have a well-defined volume.
This concern creeps up repeatedly in what follows. The Gaussian window is
                                                  exp(−x2 /2RW2
                                                                )
                                W (x; RW ) =            3/2 3
                                                                                        (12)
                                                    (2π) RW
with a Fourier transform that also has the form of a Gaussian

                                W (k; RW ) = exp(−k 2 /2RW
                                                         −2
                                                            ),                          (13)

with a width that is the reciprocal of its width in real space. The volume of the Gaussian
window is VW = (2π)3/2 RW
                        3
                          .
  The density fluctuation field is assumed to be a Gaussian random variable so the smoothed
density fluctuation field δ(~x; R) is then a Gaussian random variable as well because it rep-
resents a sum of Gaussian random variables. The variance of δ(~x; R) can be computed in
the same way as before [see Eq. (3)] and is
                                                  Z
                      σ 2 (R) = hδ 2 (~x; R)i =       d ln k ∆2 (k)|W (k; R)|2.         (14)

Thus, the probability of attaining a value of δ(~x; R) between δ and δ + dδ is
                                        1
                        P (δ; R)dδ = q        exp[−δ 2 /2σ 2 (R)]dδ.                    (15)
                                          2
                                      2πσ (R)
                                                                                              8




FIG. 1:   Power spectra in the standard ΛCDM cosmology with ΩM = 1 − ΩΛ = 0.3, h = 0.7,
σ8 = 0.93, and ΩB h2 = 0.022. The left panel shows the mass variance smoothed with a real space
tophat window as a function of the smoothing mass or smoothing radius [Eq. (14)]. The right
panel shows the rms density fluctuation per logarithmic interval of wavenumber as a function of
wavenumber [Eq. (3)].



It is common to refer to the smoothing scale as either a length, as above, or a mass given
by the mean density multiplied by the volume of the window M = ρM VW . The left panel of
Fig. 1 depicts a standard model power spectrum expressed as the variance of the smoothed
density field, smoothed with a real-space tophat, and shows the smoothing scale in terms
of both mass and length. The right panel of Fig. 1 shows the rms density fluctuation per
logarithmic interval in wavenumber ∆(k). The power spectra were computed assuming
ΩM = 1 − ΩΛ = 0.3, h = 0.7, σ8 = 0.93, ΩB h2 = 0.022, and a spectrum of primordial
fluctuations with Pprim (k) ∝ k. I have used the transfer function of Eisenstein & Hu [26]
to process the scale-invariant primordial spectrum into the post-recombination spectrum of
density fluctuations out of which nonlinear structures form.


                 III.   THE PRESS-SCHECHTER MASS FUNCTION


   Press & Schechter [1] derived a relation for the mass spectrum of virialized objects from
the hierarchical density field. In hierarchical models, there is structure on all scales and the
                                                                                               9

variance σ 2 (R) → ∞ as the smoothing scale R → 0. Press & Schechter essentially assumed
that objects will collapse on some small scale once the smoothed density contrast on this
scale exceeds some threshold value, but that the nonlinearities introduced by these virialized
objects do not affect the collapse of overdense regions on much larger scales. The collapsed
objects act only as resolution elements that trace the larger-scale fluctuations which may
collapse at some later time. Strictly speaking, this is not correct; however, it is approximately
true when primordial power spectra are sufficiently shallow that the additional large-scale
power generated by nonlinearities is small compared to the primordial fluctuations on these
scales (a study in one-dimension is Ref. [27]). Moreover, this assumption leads to a simple
parsing of the ingredients in the formation of nonlinear structure. The first ingredient is a
characterization of the statistical properties of the primordial density fluctuations. In the
standard picture this is set during the inflationary epoch. The second ingredient is the
evolution of overdensities according to linear perturbation theory. This is encapsulated in
the growth function D(a) = δ(k, a)/δ(k, a = 1) which is specified by the evolution of the
background cosmology (e.g., Refs. [19, 28, 29]). The last ingredient is the threshold for
collapse into a virialized object and is determined by examining the nonlinear collapse of
spherical overdensities.
   Press & Schechter stated that the likelihood for collapse of objects of a specific size or
mass (R ∝ M 1/3 ) could be computed by examining the density fluctuations on the desired
scale. They continued by using a model for the collapse of a spherical tophat overdensity
to argue that collapse on scale R should occur roughly when the smoothed density on that
scale exceeds a critical value δc , of order unity, independent of R.
   The implementation of the Press-Schechter prescription is simple. The mass within a
region in which the smoothed density fluctuation (dictated by the linear theory) is the
critical value δc , at some redshift z, corresponds to an object that has just virialized with
mass M(R). The relationship between mass and smoothing scale is set by the volume of the
window function. As an example, the relationship is M = 4πρM R3 /3 for a tophat window
and M = (2π)3/2 ρM R3 for a Gaussian window. Further, any region that exceeds the critical
density fluctuation threshold, will meet that threshold when smoothed on some larger scale
R′ > R. Consequently, the cumulative probability for a region to have a smoothed density
above threshold gives the fractional volume occupied by virialized objects larger than the
                                                                                            10

smoothing scale F (M). Integrating Eq. (15), this probability is
                                                                   !
                                                   1     ν
                                    Z ∞
                         F (M) =     P (δ; R)dδ = erfc √ ,                          (16)
                                  δc               2      2
where erfc(x) is the complementary error function, and ν ≡ δc /σ(M) is the height of the
threshold in units of the standard deviation of the smoothed density distribution. In this
model, collapse of mass M is defined so that it occurs when the smoothed density fluctuation
is δc on the appropriate scale. Thus there is a typical scale that is collapsing at the present
epoch, M⋆ , when the variance is σ(M⋆ ) = δc .
   In the hierarchical power spectra that we consider, σ(R) becomes arbitrarily large as R
becomes arbitrarily small. Thus, F (0) in Eq. (16) should give the fraction of all mass in
virialized objects; however, erfc(0) = 1 so that Eq. (16) states that only half of the mass
density of the universe is contained in virialized objects. Press & Schechter noted this as
a problem associated with not counting underdense regions in the integral Eq. (16). These
authors argued that underdense regions will collapse onto overdense regions and multiplied
F (M) in Eq. (16) by a factor of two in order to account for all mass. Though the sense
of this effect is certainly such that more mass will be contained in bound objects, that this
should lead to precisely a factor of two increase in F (M) is far from convincing.
   Proceeding with this extra factor of two, the number of virialized objects with masses
between M and M + dM is
                                 dn       ρM dF (M)
                                     dM =           dM.                                   (17)
                                dM        M dM
In terms of the mass variance, this is
                                   s
                                                              δ2
                                                                       !
                     dn                2 ρM δc d ln σ
                        dM =                          exp   − c2           dM
                     dM                π M 2 σ d ln M        2σ
                                   s
                                                              ν2
                                                                   !
                                       2 ρM d ln ν
                               =            ν       exp     −          dM.                (18)
                                       π M 2 d ln M           2
Without regard to the details of the shape of the power spectrum, σ(M) or ν(M), the mass
function is close to a power law dn/dM ∝ M −2 for M ≪ M⋆ and is exponentially cut-off
      > M⋆ .
for M ∼


          IV.    EXCURSION SET THEORY OF THE MASS FUNCTION


   A weakness of the Press-Schechter approach is that it does not account for the fact that
at a particular smoothing scale δ(~x; R) may be less than δc , yet it may be larger than δc
                                                                                             11

at some larger smoothing scale R′ > R. It seems natural that this larger volume should
collapse to form a virialized object, overwhelming the more diffuse patches within it. Clearly,
the sense of including this effect is to increase the fraction of mass in collapsed objects and
mitigate the factor of two discrepancy in the Press-Schechter formulas. In the literature, the
issue of regions below threshold on a particular scale, but above threshold on a larger scale
is referred to as the “cloud-in-cloud” problem. The cloud-in-cloud problem is closely tied to
the Press-Schechter factor of two as I discuss below.
   To solve the cloud-in-cloud problem, it is necessary to compute the largest value of the
smoothing scale for which the density threshold is exceeded. This was done in a formal way
by Bond et al. [18] (see also Refs. [30, 31, 32]) and I follow their approach quite closely. The
development of Bond et al. in turn follows closely the elegant review of stochastic processes
by Chandrasekhar [23], and makes use of results from both Ref. [24] and Ref. [33].
   In what follows, I consider the density contrast field evaluated at some early time far
before any scales of interest have approached the nonlinear regime, but extrapolated to
the present day using linear perturbation theory. In this way, the density contrast field
does not need to obey the physical constraint δ ≥ −1 because this is merely the linear
extrapolation of a density contrast of much smaller magnitude. In addition, all coordinates
are Lagrangian coordinates defined at the same early time so that the position of each mass
element is independent of time. The excursion set theory is, at its foundation, a set of
rules for assigning mass elements to virialized objects of various sizes. Where needed, I
will introduce the necessary conversions that map the initial Lagrangian sizes of overdense
and underdense regions onto Eulerian coordinates, thereby accounting for the contraction
or expansion of such regions respectively.
   Consider again evaluating the field δ(~x; R) at various values of the smoothing scale R, at
a single point ~x. For now, I will suppress the argument ~x and consider δ(R) as a function of
smoothing scale at a single point in space. For very large R, σ(R) ≪ δc so the probability
that the region lies above the boundary δc is vanishingly small. With decreasing R, the
standard deviation becomes larger and δ(R) will eventually reach δc at the first up-crossing
of the boundary. The problem is to compute the probability that the first up-crossing of
the barrier at δc occurs on a scale R. For simplicity in what follows, let S ≡ σ 2 (R) and
let the value of S serve to denote the smoothing scale by exploiting the fact that S is a
monotonically decreasing function of R. I will then refer to the density contrast on that
                                                                                              12

scale as δ(S). Throughout this discussion, it is important to remember that increasing
S corresponds to decreasing R. The problem is to compute the probability that the first
up-crossing through the barrier occurs between a value S and S + dS.
   Consider starting at a large smoothing scale, or small S = S1 , where δ(S1 ) ≡ δ1 < δc .
For a given change in the filtering scale ∆S, there is some distribution for the probability of
reaching δ2 after an increment ∆S = S2 − S1 > 0. In general, this probability distribution
may depend not only on the size of the step ∆S, but the value of the density field on other
scales. If the probability distribution for δ2 after an increment ∆S depends upon other points
on the curve δ(S), solving for the probability distribution of δ at a given S is nontrivial. An
important special case is when the smoothing window used to define δ(S) is a k-space tophat
as in Eqs. (10)-(11). In that case, increasing the filter scale corresponds to adding a set of
independent Fourier modes to the smoothed density. These modes have not played a role in
determining δ(S) at other smoothing scales. In this special case, the transition probability
for a change in density ∆δ associated with a change in filtering scale ∆S is Gaussian with
zero mean and variance S2 − S1 = ∆S, independent of the starting point δ1 (S1 ).
   Following Bond et al. [18], it is common to refer to a sequence of δ(Si ) given by many
subsequent increases of the smoothing scale by increments ∆Si as a trajectory for δ(S). In
the case of k-space tophat filtering of the density field, each trajectory of δ(S) executes a
Brownian random walk. Three examples of such uncorrelated random walks are shown in
Fig. 2. Notice that trajectories pierce the “barrier” at δc many times and drop below δc
between subsequent up-crossings. The aim of the excursion set approach is to solve the
cloud-in-cloud problem by determining the largest smoothing scale R or M, or equivalently
the smallest value of the variance S, at which a trajectory penetrates the barrier at δc .
   In the case of k-space tophat filtering, the probability of a transition from δ1 to δ2 =
δ1 + ∆δ is
                             Π(δ2 , S2 ) dδ2 = Ψ(∆δ; ∆S) d(∆δ),                              (19)

where
                                                           (∆δ)2
                                                                   !
                                        1
                   Ψ(∆δ; ∆S) d(∆δ) = √      exp         −              d(∆δ)                 (20)
                                       2π∆S               2(∆S)2
is the Gaussian transition probability. Taking S1 = 0, S2 the smoothing scale of interest,
and finding the probability of δ2 ≥ δc returns the Press-Schechter probability for being in a
collapsed object. The fact that some regions will exceed δc for a smaller change in S and
                                                                                               13




FIG. 2: Three examples of random walks of δ(S) assuming each s step is independent as in the case
of a sharp k-space window function. The axes are arbitrary. The horizontal dotted line represents
some threshold value δc . Notice that trajectories may penetrate the “barrier” at δc many times.



then fall below δc by ∆S has not yet been accounted for.
   Consider now, relating the distribution of δ at one value of the smoothing scale Π(δ, S)
to the distribution on a subsequent step Π(δ, S + ∆S) (smaller smoothing scale, larger S).
This is
                                       Z
                     Π(δ, S + ∆S) =        d(∆δ) Ψ(∆δ; ∆S)Π(δ − ∆δ, S).                      (21)

Taylor expanding Eq. (21) for small transitions, keeping terms up to (∆δ 2 ), and integrating
each term yields
                                    h(∆δ)2 i ∂ 2 Π h∆δi ∂Π
                                                                   !
                           ∂Π
                              = lim               −        .                                 (22)
                           ∂S  ∆S→0   2∆S ∂δ 2      ∆S ∂δ
Using the fact that the transition probability is a Gaussian with h∆δi = 0 and h(∆δ)2 i = ∆S
reveals
                                           ∂Π   1 ∂2Π
                                              =                                              (23)
                                           ∂S   2 ∂δ 2
as the relation governing the evolution of the probability distribution Π with smoothing
                                                                                                 14

scale. The probability distribution Π for trajectories δ(S) that never exceed δc prior to
some specific value of S can be obtained by solving Eq. (23) with the appropriate boundary
conditions. The first boundary condition is that Π(δ, S) is finite as δ → −∞. Imagining
each trajectory as absorbed and removed from the sample of trajectories at the moment it
first crosses the threshold at δc , then Π(δc , S) = 0 provides the second boundary condition.
   Eq. (23) may have a familiar form as it is also an equation describing diffusion with no
drift or a one-dimensional heat equation describing heat flow in a long, thin, semi-infinite
bar. The boundary condition at δ = δc is analogous to fixing the temperature to zero at
this end of the bar. Take δ(S0 ) = δ0 as an arbitrary starting point for the random walk
trajectories so that the initial condition is Π(δ0 , S0 ) = δD (δ0 ) where δD (x) is the Dirac delta
function. Eq. (23) can now be solved using familiar techniques. It is easiest to work in a
shifted variable γ ≡ δc − δ so that the finite boundary is at γ = 0.
   The first step is to Fourier transform Eq. (23) in the variable γ (with conjugate ω). Thus
we define the Fourier transform of the probability distribution
                                                 Z
                                    Π̃(ω, S) =       dγ Π(γ, S)eiωγ .                          (24)

This gives an equation for the transform
                                              ∂ Π̃    ω2
                                                   = − Π̃                                      (25)
                                              ∂S      2
with solution
                                                     −ω 2
                                                                       !
                                 Π̃(ω, S) = c(ω) exp      S .                                  (26)
                                                      2
The boundary condition at γ = 0 (δ = δc ) guarantees that c(ω) is an odd function, so
                                         Z ∞
                                                                   2
                             Π(δ, S) =         c(ω) sin(ωγ) e−ω S/2 dω.                        (27)
                                          0

Applying the initial condition to Eq. (27) gives
                                                    ω2
                                                                       !
                                      2
                                c(ω) = sin(ωγ0) exp    S0 ,                                    (28)
                                      π             2
where γ0 ≡ δ0 − δc . The final solution then follows by inverting the transform, so
                                                                               !
                           2                               −(S − S0 ) 2
                               Z ∞
                 Π(γ, S) =           sin(ωγ0 ) sin(ωγ) exp           ω             dω,         (29)
                           π    0                              2
from which
                                           (∆δ)2                    [2(δc − δ0 ) − ∆δ]2
                                "                     !                                   !#
                         1
            Π(δ, S) = √      exp         −                − exp   −                        ,   (30)
                        2π∆S                2∆S                            2∆S
                                                                                              15

where ∆S = S − S0 and ∆δ = δ − δ0 . The solution to Eq. (23) in Eq. (30) depends on the
initial condition only with regard to the height of the barrier at δc in relation to the starting
position at δ0 . The first term in Eq. (30) is the Gaussian distribution that represents the
points above threshold at S while the second term accounts for the trajectories that have
been removed because they crossed above threshold at a filter scale S ′ < S but would have
crossed back below the threshold by S. Chandrasekhar [23] gives an elegant solution to this
“absorbing barrier” problem almost upon inspection, exploiting the fact that random walks
that hit the barrier have equal probability of continuing upward after their first encounter
with the barrier as they do of continuing downward. Upon making that realization, the
solution above can be obtained using the method of images and subtracting the contribution
from another source beginning at Π(δ, S = S0 ) = δD (δ−2δc ), a shift of δc above the threshold.
The derivation given here is most useful because it contains the logic needed to generalize
the problem to more complicated processes and barriers.
   The fraction of trajectories that have crossed above the threshold at or prior to some
scale S(M) is the complement of the Π distribution,
                                                                        !
                                     Z δc
                                                         δc − δ0
                        F (S) = 1 −    Π(δ, S) dδ = erfc √       .                          (31)
                                    −∞                     2∆S
Taking S0 = 0 and δ0 = 0 to indicate a starting value at very large smoothing scale, Eq. (31)
is precisely the value given by Press & Schechter [1], but without having to introduce an
arbitrary factor of two to achieve the correct normalization. The second term in Eq. (30) that
accounts for trajectories that crossed threshold at some large scale and then traversed back
back below threshold by S accounts for the probability missing from the Press-Schechter
argument.
   The differential probability for a first piercing of the threshold then follows by differenti-
ation,
                                                               !
                                   dF                  ∂Π
                                                Z δc
                 f (S|δ0, S0 )dS ≡    dS =                dδ       dS
                                   dS               −∞ ∂S
                                                "      #δ
                                              1 ∂Π c
                                            =         dS
                                              2 ∂δ −∞
                                                             (δc − δ0 )2
                                                                    "       #
                                               δc − δ0
                                            = √          exp             dS.                (32)
                                                2π∆S 3/2        2∆S
Eq. (32) is the fundamental relation as it gives the probability for first crossing a threshold
given any starting point and any change in filtering scale ∆S. The function f (S|δ0, S0 )
                                                                                            16

is often referred to as the “first-crossing distribution.” In cases where the random walk
starts from S0 = 0 with δ0 = 0 these arguments are often suppressed and the first-crossing
distribution is written simply f (S). The fraction of mass in collapsed objects in a narrow
range of masses is obtained by setting S0 = 0 and δ0 = 0 and rewriting Eq. (32) in terms of
the mass that corresponds to the variance M(S),
                                                                δ2
                                                                     !
                             dF    1   δc dS
                                =√           exp              − c .                      (33)
                             dM    2πS S dM                    2S
The mass function follows by using Eq. (17) and substituting σ 2 = S results in
                                  s
                                                                     δ2
                                                                         !
                          dn          2 ρM δc d ln σ
                             =                       exp           − c2 .                (34)
                          dM          π M 2 σ d ln M                2σ
Again, this is precisely the Press-Schechter mass function with no ad hoc factor of two.
   Analytic mass spectra are often compared to simulation data without reference to specific
power spectra or cosmological models by comparing the fraction of mass in collapsed objects
per logarithmic interval in ν, νf (ν) ≡ dF/d ln ν. For the standard excursion set theory,
                                              s
                                                            ν2
                                                              !
                                                  2
                                    f (ν) =         exp   −    .                         (35)
                                                  π         2
In Fig. 3, I compare the Press-Schechter/Excursion set predictions for the fraction of mass
in collapsed objects with the results of a suite of cosmological numerical simulations. While
excursion set theory may explain the gross features of the mass spectrum of dark matter
halos, it fails in its detail. The Press-Schechter/Excursion set relations predict too many
low-mass halos and too few high-mass halos. Given the simplicity of the excursion set model
described above, this is not surprising and the level of agreement provides encouragement
that the excursion set model is a useful tool for understanding the gross features of halo
abundance, formation, and clustering. In particular, these gross features are set by the
statistics of the initial density fluctuations.
   One detail not discussed so far is the assignment of mass to a particular filter radius R
or variance S. As I have already mentioned, the Press-Schechter relation follows directly
by assuming a window function that is a tophat in Fourier space, but such a window does
not have a well-defined volume to associate with it. The method of circumventing this that
is implemented most often is to simply use the formulas derived from the sharp k-space
filtering assumption, but assign mass according to a configuration space tophat filter so that
M = 4πR3 /3ρM (though this is not the method used by Bond et al. in Ref. [18]).
                                                                                             17




FIG. 3: Collapsed mass fractions. The solid line represents the standard excursion set theory
predictions. The dashed and dotted lines represent the improved fits of Sheth & Tormen [34]
and Jenkins et al. [35] respectively. The points represent numerical data from a suite of N-body
simulations reluctantly provided by J. L. Tinker.



   In the context of excursion set theory, the k-space tophat window function serves only
to simplify the solution for Π(δ, S) [Eq. (30)] and the first barrier up-crossing distribution
[Eq. (32)]. In principle, other windows can be used but the mathematics become significantly
more complicated. This is because the steps are no longer independent so it is necessary
to compute the entire trajectory at once to account for the correlations between the steps.
Ref. [18] demonstrates the general procedure which amounts to generating a large number
of solutions to a Langevin equation of random motion (e.g., , see Ref. [23]) with a corre-
lated stochastic force. Each solution yields a single trajectory of density at each value of
the smoothing scale. The probability distributions can be computed from an ensemble of
                                                                                              18

trajectories. This procedure is potentially complicated and time consuming, and it has the
drawback that it does not yield a closed-form solution for the Π(δ, S) or first up-crossing
distributions. For these reasons, other filters are rarely discussed; however, it is important
to keep in mind that the lack of correlations between different steps is not a prediction of
excursion set theory. Contrarily, it is a simplifying assumption used in the most common
implementation of excursion set theory.


 V.   EXCURSION SET THEORY OF THE SPATIAL BIAS OF DARK MATTER
                                             HALOS


   It has long been appreciated that within the context of cosmological structure forma-
tion theories, the clustering of dark matter halos differs from the overall clustering of mat-
ter [34, 36, 37, 38, 39]. The excursion set formalism provides a neat framework with which
to understand the relative clustering of halos. The argument is much the same as the
peak-background split approach developed in Refs. [36, 37, 40], and was expressed in the
framework of the excursion set model by Mo & White [38] as I outline below.
   Consider the solution to the excursion set problem in Eq. (30). This gives the probability
distribution of δ given that on a smoothing scale S0 , the smoothed density fluctuation is
δ0 . Notice that the important quantity is the relative height of the density threshold δc − δ0
so that in regions with δ0 > 0 on large scales, trajectories are more likely to penetrate the
barrier at δc and conversely for δ0 < 0. This means that Eq. (31) and Eq. (32) allow for the
calculation of the mass function in regions with specific large-scale density fluctuations.
   The fraction of mass in collapsed halos of mass greater than M in a region that has a
smoothed density fluctuation δ0 on scale S0 (corresponding to mass M0 and volume V0 ) is
given by Eq. (31),                                            !
                                                        δc − δ0
                                  F (M|δ0 , S0 ) = erfc         .                         (36)
                                                         2∆S
Notice that as the density of the region increases, F increases because smaller upward
excursions are needed to cross the threshold. When δ0 → δc , F → 1 because the entire
region will then be interpreted as a collapsed halo of mass M0 . The fraction of mass in halos
with mass in the range M to M + dM is

                             dS      dF (M|δ0 , S0 )
            f (M|δ0 , S0 )      dM ≡                 dM
                             dM          dM
                                                                                            19

                                                          (δc − δ0 )2
                                                                   "        #
                                      1 δc − δ0 dS
                                   = √              exp −             dM,                  (37)
                                       2π ∆S 3/2 dM          2∆S
so that regions with smoothed density δ0 on scale S0 contain, on average,
                                               M0                dS
                        N (M|δ0 , S0 )dM =        f (M|δ0 , S0 )    dM                     (38)
                                               M                 dM
halos in this mass range.
   The quantity of interest is the relative over-abundance of halos in dense regions compared
to the mean abundance of halos,
                                 L           N (M|δ0 , S0 )
                                δhalo =                     − 1,                           (39)
                                           (dn(M)/dM)V0
where dn(M)/dM is the mean number density of halos in a mass range of width dM about
M from Eq. (34). The superscript L indicates that this is the overdensity in the initial
Lagrangian space determined by the mass distribution at some very early time, ignoring the
dynamical evolution of the overdense patch.
   The relative overdensity of halos in large overdense and underdense patches is easy to
compute. In sufficiently large regions, S0 ≪ S, δ0 ≪ δc . Expanding Eq. (39) to first order
in the variables S0 /S and δ0 /δc gives a simple relation between halo abundance and dark
matter density (see also Refs. [37, 40])
                                       L        ν2 − 1
                                      δhalo =          δ0 ,                                (40)
                                                  δc
where ν = δc /S 1/2 = δc /σ(M) as before. The overdensity in the initial Lagrangian space is
proportional to the dark matter overdensity and is a function of halo mass through ν. The
final ingredient needed to relate the abundance of halos to the matter density is a model
for the dynamics that can map the initial Lagrangian volume to the final Eulerian space.
Let V and δ represent the Eulerian space variables corresponding to the Lagrangian space
variables V0 and δ0 . The final halo abundance is
                                            N (M|δ0 , S0 )
                                 δhalo =                   − 1.                            (41)
                                           (dn(M)/dM)V
   Mo & White [38] give an extensive discussion of the mapping from Lagrangian to Eule-
rian coordinates and use a spherical collapse model to determine the appropriate mapping
quantitatively. In the limit of a small overdensity δ0 ≪ 1, V ≃ V0 (1 + δ), δ ≃ δ0 , and
                                                 ν2 − 1
                                                              !
                                   δhalo = 1 +          δ                                  (42)
                                                   δc
                                         ≡ bh δ.                                           (43)
                                                                                                  20




FIG. 4:   The large-scale bias of dark matter halos as a function of the scaled variable ν. The
solid line gives the prediction of the standard Press-Schechter or excursion set theory in Eq. (42).
The dashed line is a modified form for the bias that follows from a modified form for the barrier
criterion given by Sheth & Tormen in Ref. [34]. The dotted line represents an empirical fit to
N-body simulation results given by Seljak & Warren [39]. The points represent numerical data
from a suite of N-body simulations kindly provided by J. L. Tinker.



The halo overabundance is proportional to the matter overdensity and always has the same
sense. This proportionality is commonly referred to has the halo bias bh = (1 + [ν 2 − 1]/δc ).
Interestingly, Eq. (42) gives a mass scale at which halos are not biased with respect to
the dark matter. At a halo mass equal to the typical collapse mass, M = M⋆ , ν = 1 or
σ(M) = δc so that the halo overdensity is the same as the total matter overdensity, δhalo = δ.
Larger halos will have larger values of ν = δc /σ(M) because σ(M) decreases with mass, so
larger halos cluster considerably more strongly than the overall clustering of mass, while
halos with M < M⋆ cluster more weakly than the overall mass distribution.
   The large-scale halo bias relation of Eq. (42) is plotted as a function of scaled peak height
ν, in Fig. 4. In that figure, I also plot numerical results for the relative clustering bias of halos
                                                                                               21

as well as improved fits for halo bias given by Sheth & Tormen [34] and Seljak & Warren [39].
The fit of Sheth & Tormen in Ref. [34] can be motivated by excursion set theory with a
modified form for the shape of the barrier as a function of smoothing scale (e.g., Refs. [41, 42],
and see § IX). These simple prescriptions for halo bias form one of the cornerstones of the
analytic halo model that is often used to quantify the clustering of both dark matter and
galaxies rapidly without resorting to a full numerical treatment [43, 44, 45, 46, 47]. As
with the mass function, the standard excursion set approach gives an understanding of the
general features of the halo bias, but fails to reproduce the halo bias in detail.


       VI.    AN EXCURSION SET MODEL FOR VOIDS IN THE GALAXY
                                      DISTRIBUTION


   The excursion set model relates the initial density field on particular scales to specific
structures in the evolved density field. To compute the properties of halos, one considers
overdensities in the initial smoothed density field but it seems natural that this logic can
be extended to underdense regions, and in particular, to voids in the density distribution.
This is a particularly interesting application of the excursion set theory because of the
relatively simple dynamics of underdense patches. Whereas overdense patches collapse,
underdense patches expand more rapidly than the universal expansion rate. Contrary to
the complicated behavior of overdensities, general underdense patches that are not initially
spherically-symmetric, tophat underdensities evolve toward spherically-symmetric tophat
underdensities [48, 49, 50, 51]. This fact is encouraging. It suggests that a density threshold
criterion based on a spherical, tophat model may be a more realistic model of void evolution
than it is of the collapse of overdense patches.
   Sheth & Van Weygaert [51] made precisely this realization and applied the excursion set
model to predict the abundance and sizes of voids in the universe. Most of the details of
the excursion set model of voids can be found in their paper. The logic is quite similar
to that of the previous two sections. First, it is necessary to assign a barrier height to
designate a region that should be identified with a void, δv < 0. (At this point, I reiterate
that the overdensities that we consider are initial overdensities evaluated at some very early
time, before any scales of interest have gone nonlinear, and extrapolated to z = 0 using
the linear theory of evolution so that overdensities are not constrained to δ ≥ −1.) The
                                                                                            22

peculiar acceleration of a mass shell in a spherical underdense region is proportional to the
integrated deficit in mass within the spherical region. A consequence of this is that inner
shells accelerate outward faster than shells of mass on the outer edge of an underdense region.
Mass shells start to accumulate in a narrow range of radii leading to a very high density
ridge on the outer boundary of the underdense patch. Eventually, the inner shells overtake
the outer shells at the moment of shell crossing. The relevant calculations are collected and
reviewed in the appendices of Ref. [51].
   In the now defunct standard cold dark matter model with ΩM = 1, shell crossing for a
spherical tophat overdensity occurs at a linearly-extrapolated overdensity of δv = −2.81.
This is analogous to the case of spherical tophat overdensity collapse, where collapse to a
point occurs when the linearly-extrapolated overdensity is δc = 1.69. As with the spherical
tophat overdensity, there is a weak dependence on cosmological parameters that I will ignore
for the purposes of this discussion. Blumenthal et al. [52] argued that galaxy voids should
be identified with regions that have just experienced shell crossing. Again, this is analogous
to defining halos as regions that have just experienced complete collapse. In this case, the
galaxies in the void walls would lie on the overdense ridges that form at shell crossing. The
model of Sheth & Van Weygaert [51] adopts this identification of voids with regions that just
experience shell crossing and identify voids with the largest regions for which the smoothed
density achieves the threshold δv = −2.81.
   In contrast to the case of halos, voids present an additional challenge to computing the
first crossing distribution. The additional difficulty is that an underdense region may be
contained in a still larger overdense region which may collapse around the underdensity,
engulfing and eliminating the void. Therefore, it is sensible that there be a second criterion
that the smoothed density not exceed some overdensity threshold δcv > 0, on some scale
larger than the first crossing of δv . The appropriate height of the second barrier δcv is not
obvious. It is clear that δcv ≤ δc because a void cannot reside within a virialized halo. Thus,
the least restrictive choice that can be made is δcv = δc = 1.69. However, this does not
account for the fact that some voids may be squeezed due to large-scale overdensities that
have not yet collapsed and virialized and so it likely leads to an overestimate of the volume
filling factor of voids in the universe. Sheth & Van Weygaert [51] also explore δcv = 1.06
as this linearly-extrapolated overdensity corresponds to the moment of turnaround, or the
transition from expansion to contraction, for a spherical overdensity. The drawback of this
                                                                                                23

choice is that it completely erases voids in regions that are only just turning around so that
this choice likely leads to an underestimate of the filling factor of voids in the universe. This
discussion suggests that the appropriate value of the “void-squashing” overdensity should
be in the range 1.06 < δcv < 1.69.
     The first step in modeling the void population with the excursion set theory should now
be clear. It is necessary to solve for the first crossing distribution of the barrier δv subject to
the additional restriction that the barrier at δcv is not achieved at some larger scale either.
As in § IV, it is convenient to solve for the probability distribution of trajectories that do
not impact either barrier Π(δ, S), and to derive the first-crossing distribution from Π(δ, S).
As before, the distribution of δ at any value of S obeys
                                           ∂Π   1 ∂2Π
                                              =        .                                      (44)
                                           ∂S   2 ∂δ 2
In the case of voids, trajectories are removed from consideration when they impinge upon ei-
ther of the two barriers at δcv or δv so that the boundary conditions are Π(δv , S) = Π(δcv , S) =
0.
     This system of equations is the one-dimensional heat equation describing heat flow in
a long, thin bar of finite length held at fixed temperature at both ends. As such, it has
a solution that is likely to be familiar. To begin with, unlike the case of the single-barrier
problem in § IV, the solution to this boundary value problem can only be a superposition of a
discrete set of sinusoidal modes, namely those modes that individually obey the homogeneous
boundary conditions.
     As before, it is convenient to define a new variable γ ≡ δ − δv . In that case, Eq. (44) still
holds with δ replaced by γ and the boundary conditions are Π(γ = 0, S) = Π(γ = γc,v =
δcv − dv, S) = 0. As before, trajectories start at δ = 0 at S = 0 so that the initial condition
is Π(γ, S = 0) = δD (γ + δv ). The solution follows straightforwardly using separation of
variables. Assuming that Π(γ, S) = G(γ)P (S), the functions G(γ) and P (S) obey
                                     1 dP    1 d2 G
                                          =         = −k 2 ,                                  (45)
                                     P dS   2G dγ 2
where k is some constant. Therefore P (S) ∝ exp(−k 2 S). The boundary conditions on G(γ)
can only be satisfied if k > 0. Thus the solution is a superposition of sines and cosines. It
is easy to show that the boundary conditions require that
                                            ∞
                                                              !
                                            X        nπ
                                   G(γ) =     cn sin      γ .                                 (46)
                                          n=1        γc,v
                                                                                                  24

The initial condition can be used to determine the cn by using the orthogonality relation for
             Rπ
sinusoids,   0    sin(ny) sin(my)dy = (π/2)δnm , where δnm is a Kronecker delta. The result is
that cn = 2 sin(nπ|δv |/γc,v )/π. Consequently, the solution to the boundary value problem is
                                ∞
                                        "                   !                               !#
                          1    X                  nπ                    nπ
             Π(δ, S) = v                    cos v       δ       − cos v       [2δv − δ]
                       δc − δv n=1              δc − δv               δc − δv
                                          n2 π 2
                                                     !
                            × exp    −              S .                                          (47)
                                       2(δcv − δv )

   In analogy with Eq. (31) and Eq. (32), trajectories are removed from the region between
the two boundaries at a “rate” of
                                                                δv
                                                   1 ∂Π c
                                      fv (S)dS = −         dS.                                   (48)
                                                   2 ∂δ δv

The lower limit of this divergence of trajectories indicates the trajectories that penetrate
the lower boundary at δ = δv . These are the void regions that we aim to model, so the first
crossing distribution is

                                 1 ∂Π
                    fv (S)dS =
                                 2 ∂δ δv
                                    nπD 2                              n2 π 2 D 2 S
                                 ∞
                                                                                   !
                                 X
                              =           sin(nπD) exp               −                dS,        (49)
                                n=1  δv2                                   2      δv2

where D ≡ |δv |/(δcv + |δv |) is the void-in-cloud parameter, following the nomenclature of
Ref. [51]. The parameter D quantifies the relative importance of eliminating voids that lie
within some larger overdense region in which the smoothed density contrast exceeds δcv .
   From the first-crossing distribution of Eq. (49), it is straightforward to compute the
“mass function” of voids, meaning the number of voids containing a specific amount of
mass. As before, it is most convenient to represent this distribution in terms of a scaled
variable νv ≡ |δv |/S 1/2 , so that the physical size distribution is determined by the size of
the smoothing scale at a particular value of the variance S and the parameter D. Then
νv fv (νv ) defined as the fraction of mass in voids per logarithmic interval d ln νv then follows
by changing variables in Eq. (49) from S to νv as in § IV. Explicitly,

                                         2nπD 2                          n2 π 2 D 2
                                    ∞
                                                                                   !
                                    X
                       νv fv (νv ) =            sin(nπD) exp           −            .            (50)
                                     n=1   ν2                              2ν 2

   This void mass spectrum is shown in the left panel of Fig. 5 for the choices of δv = −2.81
and δcv = 1.06 advocated by Sheth & Van Weygaert [51]. Two additional mass spectra
                                                                                                      25




FIG. 5: Left: The mass distribution of voids predicted by the excursion set model of Sheth & Van
Weygaert [51]. The mass distribution is given in scaled units. The horizontal axis is the absolute
value of the void threshold in units of the σ(M ) for a particular mass scale νv = |δv |/S 1/2 . The
vertical axis is the fraction of trajectories that first cross the threshold in a logarithmic interval of
νv . Physically, this is the fraction of mass in voids that have a mass corresponding to a logarithmic
interval in νv . The three lines show three choices of the overdensity threshold δcv . Right: The
physical size distribution of voids. The three lines represent the number densities of voids of radius
R for the same three choices of δcv as in the left panel.



derived from different values of δcv are shown in Fig. 5 to illustrate the importance of the void-
in-cloud parameter. The choice δcv → ∞ corresponds to ignoring completely the possibility
for a larger-scale overdensity to overwhelm a smaller void within it. Decreasing δcv makes
the probability for a larger overdensity to overwhelm a void within it higher and decreases
the number of voids of all sizes. Two things are worthy of note. First, the number of large
voids (high νv ) is independent of δcv . This is because it is very unlikely for a trajectory to
cross both the δcv and the δv thresholds at small values of S. Second, regardless of the choice
of δcv , the fraction of mass in voids is peaked around voids with νv ≈ 1 − 1.5. This places
the typical void mass in the broad range Mvoid ∼ 1011 − 1013 h−1 M⊙ . Of course, as with
the mass function, the number of voids of a particular size will be shifted toward smaller
objects because a fixed fraction of mass can be partitioned into more small voids and fewer
large voids.
                                                                                             26

   The void size spectrum in Eq. (50) gives the fraction of mass, or of volume in the initial
Lagrangian space, in voids of a particular size. The size variable is the scaled variable νv .
To convert this to a physical size spectrum where the sizes of objects are measured in units
of length or volume requires relating the initial Lagrangian volume to an Eulerian volume.
The simplest conversion follows from the fact that in the spherical tophat model, the tophat
radius expands by a factor or ∼ 1.72 by the time shell crossing occurs. Finally, one also
needs to assume a power spectrum to relate particular values of νv with volume in the initial
Lagrangian coordinate system. As before, I will assume the spectrum in Fig. 1. The logic
is then the same as that of the mass function. The number density of voids as a function
of physical void radius is shown in the right panel of Fig. 5 and reflects the basic features
of the voids model. The number density of voids is independent of δcv for large voids, and
the number of small voids is suppressed because small, underdense regions are likely to be
contained within larger overdense regions.
   So far, I have ignored the primary shortfall of the void model. The weakness of the
approach of Ref. [51] is that it defines a void as a region that is underdense with respect
to total mass whereas observationally voids are identified as underdensities in the galaxy
distribution, as noted in Ref. [51]. Furlanetto & Piran [53] have extended the Sheth & Van
Weygaert model to identify voids as regions that are underdense in the galaxy distribution.
To do this, these authors added to the excursion set theory a method for assigning galaxies
to halos and thereby established a mapping between the galaxy number density in a region
and a linearly-extrapolated overdensity. Methods for assigning galaxies to halos are beyond
the scope of this article so I will not discuss the model of Ref. [53] any further except to say
that it is a more practical approach to voids because it phrases predictions in terms of the
observed galaxy overdensity.


         VII.   HALO FORMATION IN THE EXCURSION SET THEORY


   Excursion set theory is also a powerful formalism with which to study the formation
history of halos. It is most natural to picture evolution occuring through the linear growth
of the density field. In that way, the smoothed overdensity scales with time according to
the linear growth factor D(a). Writing the smoothed density field as a function of both
the smoothing scale S and the cosmological expansion factor a, this evolution is δ(S, a) =
                                                                                                27

D(a)δ(S, a = 1). As a matter of convention, D(a) is normalized so that D(a = 1) = 1.
In the framework of excursion sets, predictions depend upon the density field in the ratio
ν = δc /σ(M) and it is often easier to envision the density field as fixed at δ(S) ≡ δ(S, a = 1)
and to consider the height of the critical density threshold as a function of time. In that way,
collapse at a scale factor a′ 6= 1 corresponds to the a = 1 density fluctuation penetrating a
barrier of height δc (a′ ) = δc /D(a′ ).
   In their pioneering paper, Bond et al. [18] briefly discussed the utility of the excursion
set approach for understanding the formation histories of halos. Subsequently, Lacey &
Cole [19] studied this problem in great detail in a rather elegant paper and I largely follow
their treatment in what follows. I will adopt the simplifying notation of Ref. [19] and refer
to the barrier height for collapse at a specific time as

                                           ω(a) ≡ δc /D(a).                                   (51)

The variable ω indicates the time of the collapse through only the linear growth function
D(a). In the “old standard” CDM model with ΩM = 1, the growth function is simply
D(a) = a and the conversion between ω and a is trivial. However, in the currently-favored
ΛCDM model, the growth function is given by an incomplete beta function integral [29] and
the conversion is more complicated.
   Many of the insights into halo formation can be gleaned by considering the two-barrier
problem, just as with halo bias and void regions in the previous two sections. Again following
the work of Lacey & Cole [19], I also adopt a simplifying notation for the conditional
probabilities of barrier crossings. I illustrate this notation by re-writing the two-barrier
probability distribution already given in Eq. (32) and Eq. (37) as

                                                                  (∆ω)2
                                                              "         #
                                                 1 ∆ω
                     f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 )dS2 = √           exp −       dS2 ,                 (52)
                                                  2π ∆S 3/2        2∆S

where ∆ω ≡ ω2 − ω1 is the difference between the two barrier heights (assumed to be
arbitrary with ω2 > ω1 ), ∆S ≡ S2 − S1 . As always, some mass M1 and M2 are associated
with the variances S1 and S2 respectively. The quantity f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 )dS2 is the conditional
probability that a trajectory pierces the barrier ω2 in an interval of width dS2 about S2 on
the condition that the trajectory first pierces ω1 at S1 . As a further shorthand, I take
f (S2 , ω2 )dS2 to denote the probability starting from a very large smoothing scale S1 = 0,
and ω1 = 0.
                                                                                               28




FIG. 6: The conditional mass function. All panels refer to the conditional mass functions of halos
fixed at z = 0 looking back toward higher redshifts as labeled in each panel. Four halo masses of
interest are shown.


   In this section and those that follow, the interpretation of Eq. (52) is different from that
in § IV and § V. In those sections, the initial condition for the random walk was fixed by
the large scale environment on some larger filtering scale S1 ≪ S2 . Here, the two barriers
represent the critical density for collapse at two different times so the change in barrier
height ∆ω represents a shift in time.


                            A.   The Conditional Mass Function


   The most immediate quantity of interest is the conditional mass function. Given a halo of
mass M1 at time t1 , one can compute the average manner in which this mass was partitioned
among smaller halos at some earlier time t2 < t1 (ω2 > ω1 ). The conditional mass function
                                                                                                             29

is simply the average number of halos of mass M2 at time t2 that are incorporated into a
mass M1 object at time t1 . This is precisely the two-barrier problem. A halo of mass M1
has its mass partitioned, on average, among a spectrum of halos at time w2 given almost
directly from Eq. (52) (e.g., see Refs. [2, 19]),

                        dn(M2 |M1 )   M1                       dS2
                                    =    f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 )     dM2 .                                    (53)
                           dM2        M2                       dM2

The function f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 ) gives the probability of the second barrier crossing at a par-
ticular value of S2 , while the factor M1 /M2 converts this from a probability per unit mass
of halo M1 into the number of halos of mass M2 .
   Figure 6 shows conditional mass functions for standard CDM power spectra normalized
such that M⋆ = 1013 h−1 M⊙ (σ8 ≃ 0.93) for four halo masses at four different lookback
redshifts, z = 1/4, z = 1/2, z = 1, and z = 3 (all panels have final redshift at z = 0). The
evolution toward increased fragmentation as the second epoch moves to higher redshifts
is evident. Notice that more massive halos fragment into small sub-units more quickly.
Also, notice that each conditional mass function goes toward an approximate power law as
M2 /M1 ≪ 1. This can be understood directly from Eq. (6). Assume that the power spectrum
is an approximate power law S(M) ≃ δc2 (M/M⋆ )−β in the mass range of interest. In the limit
                                                                                              −(4−3β)/2
of a large mass difference, ∆ω/∆S ≪ 1 and M2 /M1 ≪ 1 and dn/dM2 ∝ M2                                      . Near
M⋆ , CDM-like power spectra vary slowly, with an effective power-law index near β ≈ 0.35
                      −3/2
giving dn/dM2 ∝ M2           , which is approximately the power law shown in Figure 6.


                                   B.    Halo Accretion Rates


   The excursion set theory also provides a framework for computing mass accretion rates
as well. The two-barrier problem of § VII A can be manipulated to yield an average mass
accretion rate. Consider the probability of transitioning forward in time, from M2 at barrier
ω2 to M1 at ω1 . Bayes’ rule for combining probabilities gives the forward probability as [19]

                                               f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 )f (S1 , ω1 )
                  f (S1 , ω1 |S2 , ω2 )dS1 =                                     dS1                        (54)
                                                         f (S2 , ω2 )
                                                                     "                 #3/2
                                            1 ω1 (ω2 − ω1 )       S2
                                         = √                                                                (55)
                                             2π    ω2        S1 (S2 − S1 )
                                                                      !
                                                     (ω1 S2 − ω2 S1 )
                                           × exp −                      dS1 .                               (56)
                                                    2S1 S2 (S2 − S1 )
                                                                                                   30




FIG. 7:   Halo accretion rates per logarithmic interval of mass change. This is based on a very
similar plot in Ref. [19]. The plots show the accretion rates per unit mass change for halos of
five different masses (shown in the left panel) at z = 0. The left panel shows the probability for
a change ∆M as a function of ∆M [Eq. (58)], while the right panel shows the fractional mass
accretion rate given by (∆M/M2 ) × d2 R/d ln ∆M d ln a.



In language familiar to cosmology, f (S1 , ω1 |S2 , ω2 ) is the posterior probability, f (S1 , ω1 ) is
the prior, and f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 ) is the likelihood.
   The instantaneous probability per unit shift in barrier height follows by taking ∆ω =
(ω2 − ω1 ) → 0 in Eq. (54), giving
                                                      #3/2
                      d2 R                                         ω 2 (S2 − S1 )
                                       "                        "                #
                              1        S2
                            =√                               exp −                ,              (57)
                     dω dS1    2π S1 (S2 − S1 )                         2S2 S1

from which the probability per unit change in mass ∆M = M1 − M2 , per unit time (or
d ln a = H(a)dt) is
                                        s
                        d2 R              2 ∆M ω/σ(M1 )
                                 =
                   d ln ∆Md ln a          π M1 (1 − S1 /S2 )3/2
                                                ω 2 (S2 − S1 ) d ln ω d ln σ
                                             "                #
                                        × exp −                                .                 (58)
                                                     2S1 S2     d ln a d ln M1

The average rate of mass accretion per unit change in mass can be obtained by multiply-
ing Eq. (58) by ∆M, while the average total mass accretion rate follows from multiplying
Eq. (58) by ∆M and integrating over ln ∆M.
                                                                                            31




FIG. 8: Total halo mass accretion rates in units of halo mass and as a function of halo mass at
four different redshifts.


   The excursion set accretion rates of halos in the standard ΛCDM cosmology are sum-
marized in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. The left panel Fig. 7 shows the probability for a particular
fractional mass change as a function of the fractional mass change. The rate of accretion
by small mass increments diverges. However, the average rate of mass increase (in the right
panel of Fig. 7) converges and is dominated by the less frequent, high-mass mergers. Notice
in particular that low-mass halos increase their masses very quickly via mergers with halos
larger then themselves while halos with M ∼ > M⋆ experience only infrequent mergers with

halos larger than themselves.
   The total mass accretion rate given by integrating Eq. (58) over ln ∆M is shown in Fig. 8
for various redshifts as a function of halo masses. Fig. 8 shows explicitly that low-mass
halos should be expected increase there mass many times over in a single Hubble time. The
standard interpretation of the collection of results shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 is that low-
mass halos (M < M⋆ ) should be expected to increase their masses by mergers with halos
larger than themselves, while high-mass halos (M > M⋆ ) typically absorb smaller halos and
increase their masses relatively slowly.
                                                                                               32

                                 C.   Halo Formation Times


   It is often useful to have a sense of a time by which a halo acquired most of its mass. For
example, one may be modeling galaxies and may try to estimate stellar evolution histories
within a particular halo. Several definitions of halo formation time exist. An intuitive
definition is the time that a halo first acquires half of its final mass because once a progenitor
of a halo has achieved this threshold it can uniquely be identified as the main progenitor
of the final object. Consider the formation time given by this definition ωF or, in terms of
expansion factor, aF .
   It is not trivial to predict halo formation times from excursion set theory by considering
the two-barrier problem as before. The reason for this difficulty is simple to understand.
Consider the formation of a halo of mass M1 at time ω1 . The probability of crossing a
higher threshold ω2 (corresponding to earlier time) at some value of the variance greater
than S2 = S(M2 = M1 /2) > S1 gives only the probability per unit mass that the halo
has some progenitor with mass M2 ≤ M1 /2 at time ω2 . It does not guarantee that this is
the mass of the most massive of all of the subunits that merged to form the halo of mass
M1 at ω1 . Lacey & Cole [19] circumvent this difficulty by giving an approximate counting
argument for the formation time. I reproduce the argument of Ref. [19] in what follows.
   First, the results of § VII B give the number of halos of mass M2 at time t2 that are
incorporated into halos of mass M1 at t1 > t2 as
                              d2 n     dn(M2 )
                                     =         f (S1 , ω1 |S2 , ω2 ).                        (59)
                             dM2 dS1    dM2
So long as M2 > M1 /2, each trajectory must connect two unique halos because there cannot
be two paths each of which contain more than half of the final halo mass. However, it is
possible that a halo of mass M1 at t1 has no progenitor of mass greater than M1 /2 at time
t2 . The counting argument accounts for this. The probability that a halo of mass M1 at t1
has a progenitor in the mass range M1 ≥ M2 > M1 /2 at time t2 is then given by the ratio
of halos that evolve to a halo of mass M1 relative to the total number of halos of mass M1 ,
                             dP   [dn(M2 )/dM2 ]f (S1 , ω1 |S2 , ω2 )
                                =                                     .                      (60)
                            dM2    [dn(M1 )/dM1 ]||dS1 /dM1 |−1
Using Bayes’ rule again and the definitions of the mass functions in terms of the first-crossing
distributions gives                         !
                              dP       M1                             dS2
                                 =              f (S2 , ω2|S1 , ω1)       .                  (61)
                             dM2       M2                             dM2
                                                                                                      33



                                                       3.5
    1.6
                                                         3
    1.4
    1.2                                                2.5

       1                                                 2
    0.8
                                                       1.5
    0.6
                                                         1
    0.4
    0.2                                                0.5

       0                                                 0
           2        3        4       5        6          0.2         0.4       0.6        0.8    1



FIG. 9: The probability distributions for formation times in the standard ΛCDM cosmology with
a scale-invariant primordial power spectrum normalized to σ8 = 0.93, so that M⋆ = 1013 h−1 M⊙ .
The left panel shows the distribution as a function of threshold height dP (ωF )/dωF while the right
panel shows the probability distribution of formation scale factors dP (aF )/daF .



The cumulative probability of a formation time prior to time t2 is then the integral
                                                                   !
                                                               M1
                                             Z S2 =S(M1 /2)
             P (tF < t2 ) = P (ωF > ω2 ) =                        f (S2′ , ω2 |S1 , ω1 )dS2′ ,       (62)
                                              S1               M2

and the differential probability can be obtained by differentiating Eq. (62) with respect to
either ωF or tF .
   Formation time distributions computed from Eq. (62) are shown in Fig. 9 for a variety
of halo masses at z = 0 (a = 1, ωF = δc ≃ 1.69). The most obvious feature of formation
times is that small halos form early and large halos form relatively late in accordance with
our general expectation in hierarchical models of structure formation. Note also that in the
simplest implementation of the excursion set formalism, in particular making use of k-space
tophat filtering of the density field, the conditional probability f (S2 , ω2 |S1 , ω1 ) is a function
only of the differences S2 − S1 and ω2 − ω1 . In this case, this means that the formation times
in particular and, more generally, the entire formation histories of halos are independent
of the larger-scale environments that halos reside in. In the next section, I discuss halo
formation times in the context of halo merger trees.
                                                                                              34

                             VIII.   HALO MERGER TREES


   The probability of first up-crossing at a second barrier given a particular starting point is
given by the solution to the two-barrier problem in Eq. (52). This relation has been repeated
several times throughout these notes in several forms because it is the fundamental relation
on which most physical results are based. In the preceding sections, I have applied this
formula to derive relations about various aspects of halo fragmentation and formation over
time. So far, these quantities have been averages (as in § VII A and § VII B) or probability
distributions (as in § VII C). However, as Ref. [19] describes, the interpretation of Eq. (52)
as a probability for a transition from one barrier to another means that one should be able
to draw specific fragmentation probabilities from this distribution repeatedly for a number
of time intervals ∆ωi , and thereby reconstruct individual trajectories of halo mass versus
cosmic expansion factor. This enables one to follow the fragmentation of halos on an object-
by-object basis. This is the logic behind the algorithm for the generation of Monte Carlo
merger trees described by (see also earlier methods in Refs. [54, 55, 56]).
   The trajectories δ(S) have structure on arbitrarily small scales corresponding to mergers
with very small halos. This is a restatement of the divergence of the mean number of
transitions with small mass changes shown in the left panel of Fig. 7. Consequently, it is
necessary to examine trajectories with a particular resolution in order to “smooth over”
the mergers with numerous tiny halos. In practice, each application to the prediction of
a specific physical quantity has a minimum mass scale of interest Mmin , so it is natural to
set the resolution with which trajectories are computed according to this minimum scale.
                                     √
Consider Eq. (52) in the limit ∆ω/ ∆S ≪ 1. This gives a transition probability f =
      √
∆ω/( 2π∆S 3/2 ), that is directly proportional to the time interval ∆ω. Lacey & Cole [19]
interpreted this as indicative of a probability that is due to a single, improbable merger event.
                                                         √
For this reason, Lacey & Cole refer to the limit ∆ω/ ∆S ≪ 1 as the “binary regime.” This
can be used to motivate a particular choice of step-size ∆ω that sets the resolution of the
trajectory.
                                                           √
   First, consider making the change of variable to u ≡ ∆ω/ ∆S in Eq. (52). This converts
the probability distribution to a Gaussian in the variable u with a mean of zero and a unit
variance. Of course, the probability distribution is one-sided in that it is subject to the
constraint u ≥ 0. To resolve individual, binary mergers of a parent halo of mass M with a
                                                                                             35

merging halo at the threshold Mmin the step-size should obey
                                       v
                                       u dS(M)
                                       u
                                     <
                                   ∆ω t        M               min ,                       (63)
                                       ∼         dM
so that these mergers are in the binary regime. Authors often parameterize this guideline
                     q
and set ∆ω = fstep |dS/dM|Mmin . The guideline in Eq. (63) makes a transition with
∆M ≥ Mmin a rare event. The motivation behind this choice is that it is very unlikely that
the transition could be due to two rare events, so that most mergers with objects of mass
> Mmin are resolved as binary encounters. In particular, the probability for a transition
with ∆M ≥ Mmin is
                                                           √
                                       2     fstep / 2
                                                 Z
                           P (> ∆M) = √                exp(−y 2 )dy
                                        π 0
                                                 √
                                    = erf(fstep / π)                                       (64)
                                           s
                                               2
                                       ≈         fstep ,
                                               π
where the last step assumes fstep ≪ 1. The choice of fstep is motivated by the need to resolve
all mergers of objects of mass Mmin , driving fstep toward small values, and the desire to spend
as little effort as possible computing the probabilities for transitions with ∆M < Mmin ,
                                                                               < 0.3 in order
driving fstep toward large values. As I discuss below Ref. [2] advocates fstep ∼
to guarantee accuracy down to Mmin . Typical values are fstep ∼< 0.1.

   With these preliminaries out of the way, the Lacey & Cole [19] algorithm for generating
merger histories is as follows. First, determine the appropriate timestep using Eq. (63).
Second, select a transition ∆S from the probability distribution of Eq. (52) and invert the
S(M) relation to obtain both the change in mass ∆M and the new main progenitor mass
M ′ = M − ∆M. One then repeats this procedure at the new values of ω and S(M ′ ) in order
to determine the next fragmentation of the main progenitor. This process continues until
the remaining mass is less than Mmin .
   The trajectory for the main progenitor, defined as the most massive progenitor at each
timestep according to this algorithm, may form the trunk of a “merger tree.” All of the
merging halos of mass ∆M have prior fragmentation histories of their own. For each mass
∆M above the threshold Mmin , one can generate an independent history for the infalling
“branch” on the tree using the same algorithm.
   The process of constructing a mass accretion history or merger tree in this way must be
repeated numerous times in order to sample the variety of ways in which a halo of a fixed
                                                                                             36

mass at a fixed time might build up its mass. This is a Monte Carlo method for exploring the
various mass accretion histories. It is conventional to refer to each individual tree generated
in this way as a particular realization in an ensemble of merger histories.
   The algorithm for generating Monte Carlo merger trees described above is convenient
because of its simplicity. Unfortunately, while this algorithm conserves mass by construc-
tion, it overpredicts the number of progenitor halos with masses M > Mmin at previous
timesteps relative to the analytic distribution of Eq. (53). This point has been emphasized
by Somerville & Kolatt [2] (see also Ref. [21]). In other words, the Monte Carlo procedure
does not lead to a mean population of halos at high redshift that is consistent with the
excursion set relations of the previous section. In the left panel of Figure 10, I reproduce
Figure 2 of Ref. [2] in order to emphasize this point. The smooth lines in the left panel
of this figure represent the analytic conditional mass functions described in § VII A and
the histograms represent conditional mass functions from an ensemble of merger histories
constructed according to the method of Lacey & Cole [19]. That the merger tree method
of Lacey & Cole becomes more and more inconsistent with the analytic conditional mass
function with increasing redshift is evident.
   Somerville & Kolatt [2] suggested two very plausible sources for this discrepancy. The
first is that after choosing the first mass ∆M from Eq. (52), the mass of the second body in
the merger is forced to be M ′ = M − ∆M. This choice is made in order to conserve mass,
but without regard to the probability of a transition to the mass M ′ . This drives an over-
abundance of high-mass halos because all of the remaining mass is forced into a halo of mass
M ′ . The second source stems from the fact that the simple algorithm above largely neglects
accretion with transitions ∆M < Mmin when the probability for such a transition becomes
infinitely large as ∆M → 0. While Ref. [2] does not present a rigorous demonstration of a
self-consistent algorithm, they give a qualitatively well-motivated algorithm that reproduces
analytic halo conditional mass functions at high redshift very well. This new algorithm is
now the most commonly used method and I summarize it below. A successful algorithm that
is, in practice, very similar to that of Ref. [2] is developed through the papers of Sheth [57],
Sheth & Pitman [58], and Sheth & Lemson [21], though as far as I am aware, this approach
also lacks rigorous support other than that it is exact for clumps in an uncorrelated density
field. Cole et al. [3] provide another variation of the Lacey & Cole [19] merger tree algorithm
that is similar in spirit and effect to the that of Ref. [2].
                                                                                                  37




FIG. 10:   These figures are reproduced from Ref. [2]. The left panels show the distribution of
progenitor masses log dN/dM for a halo of initial mass Mi = 500 at four different redshifts. The
histograms were computed using the binary merger tree method of Lacey & Cole in Ref. [19] and
the smooth lines are the conditional mass functions of excursion set theory. The mass units are
arbitrary. The discrepancy between the conditional mass functions and the Monte Carlo merger
tree results is clear and becomes larger with increasing redshift. The right panels show the same
physical quantities. In this case the smooth lines are the same conditional mass functions as before.
The histograms show the results of the improved Monte Carlo merger tree algorithm proposed by
Somerville & Kolatt [2]. The discrepancy between the Monte Carlo method and the analytic
conditional mass functions is clearly reduced using the Somerville & Kolatt modification to the
merger tree algorithm.



   The Somerville & Kolatt [2] algorithm begins in the same manner as the original Lacey &
Cole [19] procedure. First, choose a timestep corresponding to the desired mass resolution in
accord with Eq. (63). At each timestep choose a transition ∆S from Eq. (52) and convert it
to a mass change ∆M. The algorithm now deviates from that of Lacey & Cole because the
Somerville & Kolatt algorithm allows for both multiple mergers and diffuse mass accretion.
At this point, I note that the term “diffuse mass” is used simply to refer to accretion of
objects with mass below the threshold Mmin . In the standard excursion set approach, there
is no truly diffuse mass as all mass is bound into halos of some size.
   The Somerville & Kolatt algorithm continues as follows. If ∆M < Mmin , remove it
from further consideration and regard it as diffuse accretion. If ∆M ≥ Mmin treat it as a
                                                                                             38

progenitor halo that has merged. Next, update the remaining mass to Mrem = M − ∆M.
Instead of requiring that the second member of the merger be a halo of mass M ′ = Mrem , the
Somerville & Kolatt algorithm allows for an arbitrary number of progenitors, each of which
is chosen from Eq. (52), as well as an arbitrary amount of accreted mass. The next step is
as follows. If Mrem > Mmin , choose another transition and get the new mass change ∆M ′ . If
∆M ′ > Mmin , treat it as a merger and if ∆M ′ < Mmin , treat it as accretion. Update Mrem
by subtracting ∆M ′ . This procedure is then repeated until Mrem ≤ Mmin at which point
the remaining mass is regarded as diffuse accretion. This produces a list of progenitors at
a single timestep, though the list typically consists of two members and a small quantity
of accreted mass. To fill out the tree, one applies this procedure with new timesteps to all
the progenitors in the list and so on, recursively building a merger tree. The tree is of finite
extent because each branch off of the tree terminates when all mass enters in units that are
< Mmin , so that each unit is regarded as accreted material.
   The right panel of Figure 10 is reproduced from Figure 6 of Ref. [2]. This panel shows
the conditional mass functions of progenitors from an ensemble of merger trees generated
using their algorithm compared to the analytic excursion set conditional mass functions. The
suggestions of Somerville & Kolatt [2] have succeeded in drastically reducing the discrepancy
between the analytic progenitor mass functions and the results of the Monte Carlo merger
trees.
   Examples of mass accretion histories for main progenitors (the most massive progenitor at
each timestep) computed according to this merger tree prescription are shown in Fig. 11. The
large vertical jumps correspond to very sudden increases in mass due to (perhaps multiple)
major mergers. The variety of different paths to the same final mass is evident. Also clear
in Fig. 11 is the fact that smaller halos acquire their masses relatively earlier than larger
halos, a picture that is consistent with the results shown in Fig. 7. Formation times are also
easy to compute directly from these merger histories. The distribution of formation times
among Monte Carlo realizations is shown in Fig. 12. Also shown in Fig. 12 are the formation
time distributions from § VII C, which appear to be in reasonable agreement (Note that the
agreement here is better than that shown in the paper by Lacey & Cole [19] due to the use of
the Somerville & Kolatt [2] algorithm for generating merger trees rather than a binary-split
algorithm).
   Merger trees also give a wealth of information about the manner in which the mass is
                                                                                                  39




FIG. 11: Ten examples of mass accretion histories as a function of cosmological scale factor for
main progenitors. These histories were generated using the Monte Carlo merger history method
based on excursion set theory as described in the text. The solid lines correspond to a large cluster
halo with a mass of 1015 h−1 M⊙ at z = 0 (a = 1). The dashed lines correspond to a Milky
Way-sized halo with mass M (a = 1) = 1012 h−1 M⊙ .



acquired by the parent halos. Some properties of the distribution of all mergers are extremely
simple. Consider the transition probability in the binary regime and in the regime ∆M ≪ M
so that the merging object is much smaller than the main progenitor with which it is merging.
                                                     √
In this case, the transition probability is f ∼ [∆ω/( 2π|dS(M)/dM|)]∆M −3/2 . As such,
the average mass fraction that is accreted in units in units of mass in a logarithmic interval
                                           √
ln(∆M) varies as dF/d ln(∆M) ∼ [∆ω/( 2π|dS/dM|1/2 )]∆M 1/2 for all timesteps. This
requires only that the probability be in the binary regime and that the mass change be
small. Integrating over all time, the full tree has this property as well with a deviation at
∆M ∼ 0.1M necessitated by mass conservation. The total mass accreted in units of mass
∆M per logarithmic interval d ln(∆M) integrated over the entire history of 1000 realizations
of the merger history of an M⋆ halo is shown in Fig. 13. The scaling dF/d ln(∆M) ∝ ∆M 1/2
                                                                                                40




FIG. 12: Halo formation times computed from the Monte Carlo merger tree algorithm compared
to the closed form distribution of formation times given in § VII C. The dashed lines correspond to
halos of mass 1011 h−1 M⊙ , the solid lines correspond to halos of mass 1013 h−1 M⊙ = M⋆ , and the
dash-dot lines correspond to halos of mass 1015 h−1 M⊙ . The thin, smooth lines are the analytic
predictions while the thick lines are the results 1000 realizations of the Monte Carlo procedure.



at ∆M ≪ M is evident. Integrating over ln(∆M) gives F = 1 because all mass is acquired
in the form of halos of a particular mass in the excursion set model.
   Before moving on to extensions of the simple excursion set approach it is worth drawing
attention to a simple but profound weakness of the excursion set theory that is not often
discussed in the literature, though one noteworthy exception is the lecture by White [59]. In
this and the preceding sections, I described how the excursion set theory is used to predict
the merger rates between distinct dark matter halos. However, these distinct halos are never
clearly identified in the excursion set approach. As an example, consider some patch of the
initial Lagrangian space. We can draw a sphere about each point in that patch that has a
smoothed density that is above threshold at some scale and thereby assign to each point a
halo mass. In general, each point will be assigned a mass that is different from its neighboring
                                                                                              41




FIG. 13: The total fraction of a host halo mass at a = 1 accreted in units of size ∆M/M per
logarithmic interval d ln(∆M ), dF/d ln(∆M ). The result shown is from 1000 merger histories of a
halo with mass 1013 h−1 M⊙ = M⋆ at a = 1.



points. The result of this exercise is a continuous “halo mass field,” rather than the definite
assignment of mass in certain patches to distinct halos of particular masses. This makes
tests of excursion set theory on an object-by-object basis a poorly-defined exercise because
it is unclear how to assign individual particles to halos in the initial Lagrangian space. In
fact, such tests have been made with different choices for assigning mass elements to halos
(compare Ref. [59] and Ref. [41]). This fundamental shortcoming of the excursion set theory
may partially explain the difficulty of the theory in producing self-consistent merger trees
and progenitor mass functions and its shortcomings compared to full numerical treatments.


           IX.   BEYOND THE SIMPLE EXCURSION SET APPROACH


   In the proceeding sections, I have reviewed the simplest implementation of the excursion
set approach to halo formation. While this approach provides valuable insight into the
                                                                                                42

influence of the statistical properties of the density field on the distribution and formation
of halos, in its detail it is known to have a number of shortcomings, a number of which we
have encountered already, that render it a less than ideal tool for applications where precision
is required (references [2, 20, 34, 35, 42, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66] represent an incomplete
sample of numerous studies that point out a variety issues). I will discuss briefly some of
these shortcomings and some insights into the physical origin of these shortcomings in what
follows. One point that is important to emphasize is that the excursion set approach is itself
an approximation that neglects the details of nonlinear dynamics aside from the collapse
threshold; however, the predictions discussed in the previous sections largely result from
making several further assumptions that are motivated primarily by simplicity and may not
be the basis of the most faithful implementation of excursion set theory.


                 A.   Nontrivial Barrier Shapes and Ellipsoidal Collapse


   One way in which the excursion set predictions are simplified is to assume that collapse
and virialization of a halo occurs whenever the smoothed density exceeds a critical value
δc , that is independent of any further details of the density field. Even some of the gross
qualitative aspects of excursion set theory no longer hold when this simple form for the
barrier is no longer required.
   Following Sheth [67], it is instructive to begin by studying a simple toy example such as the
linear barrier where the threshold increases with the variance B(S) = δc + βS (constructed
so that it can be easily solved). In this case the barrier recedes from the line δ = 0 at a
“rate” β. Solving for the first-crossing distribution of this barrier is equivalent to solving for
the first-crossing distribution of a constant barrier where the transition probability causes
trajectories to “drift” away from the barrier at a rate β. In this case, we can revisit the
logic that led to Eq. (22) but note that the mean transition should be h∆δi = −β∆S so
that Eq. (23) is replaced by
                                      ∂Π   1 ∂2Π     ∂Π
                                         =      2
                                                  +β    .                                     (65)
                                      ∂S   2 ∂δ      ∂δ
The boundary conditions and the initial condition are the same as before. Note that in this
case, the solution by using an image source of trajectories cannot be used because the image
trajectories would not satisfy the same differential equation [Eq. (65)].
   The solution to Eq. (65) can be greatly simplified by making the transformation Π =
                                                                                            43

U exp(β[γ − βS/2]) where γ ≡ δc − δ as in § IV. In that case U(S, γ) satisfies

                                         ∂U   1 ∂2U
                                            =        ,                                    (66)
                                         ∂S   2 ∂γ 2

which is the diffusion equation with no drift term, and the conditions

                             U(S = 0, γ) = δD (γ − δc ) exp(−βγ)                          (67)

and
                                        U(S, γ = 0) = 0                                   (68)

Following § IV, this gives the result

                                                    δ2                  [2δc − δ]2
                                                          !                          !#
                      exp(−β[βS/2 + δ])
                                           
            Π(S, δ) =      √            exp       −           − exp   −               .   (69)
                             2πS                    2S                      2S

From Eq. (69), the fundamental relation for the probability for a mass element to be above
threshold at a variance between S and S + dS is

                                                                  [βS + δc ]2
                                                                             !
                                                δc
                 flin (S|δ0 = 0, S0 = 0)dS = √         exp      −             .           (70)
                                               2πS 3/2               2S

From this solution to the simple linear barrier a mass function can be derived in the usual
way.
   It is useful to note a few things from this example. First, consider a mass function arising
from Eq. (70). For S ≪ δc /β, the mass function will have an exponential cut-off for high-
mass (low-S) objects as before. Additionally, for S ≫ δc /β the mass function will feature an
exponential suppression of low-mass object as well [compared to f (S) ∼ S −3/2 for S >> δc2
in the constant barrier case, Eq. (32)]. This is due to the fact that the barrier increases in
                                                                       √
height as S while the standard deviation of the walk increases only as S so that the barrier
becomes harder and harder to pierce at high S. In contrast, the constant barrier will always
                                                     √
be crossed because the standard deviation of the walk S, always becomes much larger than
the barrier height as S increases. This leads to a second interesting feature. Integrating
Eq. (70) over all S gives the total fraction of mass in bound halos as F = exp(−2βδc ) < 1.
The statement that all matter is bound into halos is not generally true in the excursion set
approach, but is a result of specific barrier shapes.
   In fact, nontrivial barriers may play an important practical role in understanding things
like the mass function and bias of halos. A number of papers have, essentially, argued
                                                                                                44

that the spherical collapse model that leads to the constant barrier at δc is an inadequate
description of the collapse of overdense patches and that the barrier shape can be more
complex effectively to reflect both the more complicated collapse process and the relative
differences between large and small overdense patches [41, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72] . Sheth &
Tormen [34] noted that the GIF simulations obeyed a mass function where the fraction of
mass in collapsed objects is modified from Eq. (35) to
                                   s                      !
                                   2a      1
                       fST (ν) = A    1 + √ 2p ν exp(−aν 2 /2),                               (71)
                                   π     ( aν)
with a = 0.707, p = 0.3, and A = 0.322 in order to guarantee that all mass is bound into
halos of some mass. This is the form shown in Fig. 3 and it clearly represents a major
improvement over the simple excursion set mass function. Reference [34] also showed that
this form translated into a much improved model for halo bias (using the same logic as § V)
as shown in Fig. 4.
   Subsequently, Sheth et al. [41] and Sheth & Tormen [42] discussed how the collapse
fraction in Eq. (71) is very similar to the collapse fraction one would derive from of an
excursion set model with a nontrivial barrier, the form of which is motivated by considering
the ellipsoidal, rather than spherical, collapse of overdense patches. In general, integrating
the details of ellipsoidal collapse into the excursion set formalism is quite complicated (some
examples include Refs. [68, 72, 73]). Sheth et al. [41] greatly simplified this problem by
considering the barrier that results form the mode of the distributions for ellipticity and
prolateness of overdense patches (see Refs. [41, 42, 69] for details). In short, the simplification
stems from assigning overdense patches only a single ellipsoidal shape rather than the full
distribution of possible shapes that would be realized in the cosmological density contrast
field. This yields a single barrier shape to describe ellipsoidal collapse rather than, at least
effectively, considering a barrier with a shape that should depend upon the specific properties
of each overdense patch. As it turns out, this approximation works fairly well. The resulting,
simplified barrier is [41, 42]
                                       δcell = δc (1 + βν −γ ),                               (72)

where the parameters β ≈ 0.47 and γ ≈ 0.62 are determined by considering the evolution of
an ellipsoidal density perturbation rather than a perfectly spherical density perturbation.
   Notice that the ellipsoidal collapse barrier of Eq. (72) is higher for low-mass (low-ν)
objects. The physical reasoning for this is that low-mass objects typically exhibit greater
                                                                                              45

ellipticity (e.g., Refs. [41, 69]) and are more prone to disruption by tidal interactions so that
their densities must be higher in order to overcome this countervailing effect. Notice that
one of the primary deficiencies of the constant-barrier excursion set mass function is that
it predicts considerably too many low-mass halos (see Fig. 3). As the ellipsoidal barrier is
higher for higher S (lower mass), one should expect a reduction in low-mass halos relative
to the standard excursion set mass function and this is precisely what is shown in Fig. 3.
   Finally, Sheth & Tormen [42] showed that the ellipsoidal model still failed to model accu-
rately conditional mass functions at small lookback times and large mass ratios. Moreover,
these authors also pointed out that the model did a poor job with predictions of the number
densities of halos in very overdense regions. This failure leads to the next simplification of
the excursion set approach which I will address in § IX C. However, before moving on, I will
briefly note the methods used to solve the problem of a walk toward a generic barrier, as
this problem seems to be increasingly interesting.


                                    B.   General Barriers


   It can sometimes be useful to consider more general barrier shapes. For example, Furlan-
etto et al. [74] used a barrier with a more complicated shape to model the sizes of ionized
regions during the epoch of reionization, while Sheth & Tormen [42] suggested that moving
barriers could effectively encapsulate a wide variety of phenomena such as suppression of the
collapse of small (low-mass) overdense patches in models where the dark matter is warm. In
the latter case, the suppression is due to the non-negligible primordial velocity dispersions
of the dark matter particles and the barrier shape could encode the importance of these
velocities relative to the depths of the potentials. In this section, I describe two numerical
methods to construct the first-crossing distribution for more general barrier shapes.
   The most commonly used method to solve for the first-crossing distribution of a barrier
of more general shape is direct Monte Carlo construction of the distribution. This method
is straightforward. One only needs to compute a large number of δ(S) trajectories. To con-
struct a trajectory, one computes values of δ(S) at a discrete set of values of S. Maintaining
the assumption that the smoothing of the density fluctuation field is performed with a k-
space tophat filter, each step is independent and is drawn from Eq. (20) for a step size ∆S.
At this point, one only needs to keep track of the value of S at first crossing of the barrier.
                                                                                                     46




FIG. 14: Monte Carlo solution for the first-crossing distribution of a linear barrier with β = 1,
B(S) = δc +S. The left panel shows a sample of five δ(S) trajectories that cross the linear threshold.
The thin lines are the five trajectories and the thick line is the linear barrier. The histogram in the
right panel shows the tabulated first-crossing distribution constructed from 105 trajectories. The
thin line shows the analytic solution to the first-crossing distribution from Eq. (70). It is clear that
the Monte Carlo procedure reproduces the analytic result in the case of the linear barrier.



As with generating halo merger trees, the choice of step size ∆S is important because all
trajectories will be resolved only to within ∆S. The step size must be small enough that
a transition above the barrier is rare on any given step. This ensures that multiple barrier
crossings are unlikely to be missed.
   I give an explicit example of the Monte Carlo method for the linear barrier with B(S) =
δc + S in Fig. 14. The left panel shows a sample of five trajectories that cross the linear
threshold. Of course, most trajectories do not cross the threshold in the range of S that I
show. I have selected five that do and so these trajectories are a biased subsample of the
ensemble of all trajectories. The right panel shows the tabulated first-crossing distribution
constructed from 105 trajectories. It is evident that the Monte Carlo method reproduces
the analytic result of the previous section quite well.
   Recently, Zhang and Hui [75] described a very useful and elegant method for solving the
first-crossing problem for barriers of a very wide range of possible shapes. Zhang & Hui
pointed out that the problem can be recast in the form of an integral equation that can be
                                                                                                47

solved by well-known methods.
   The first step is to recognize that all trajectories either are included in Π(δ, S) or penetrate
the barrier so that
                                Z S                 Z B(S)
                                         ′     ′
                                      f (S )dS +              Π(δ, S)dδ = 1,                  (73)
                                 0                   −∞

where f (S) is the first-crossing distribution and B(S) is the scale-dependent barrier height.
If there were no barrier, the distribution of Π(δ, S) would be given by Ψ(δ, S) from Eq. (20).
Therefore, Π(δ, S) should be given by Ψ(δ, S) minus the trajectories that pierced the barrier
at some S ′ < S and migrated downward to δ by a variance S. Thus
                                              Z S
                      Π(δ, S) = Ψ(δ, S) −           f (S ′ )Ψ(δ − B(S), S − S ′ )dS ′ .       (74)
                                               0

Taking the derivative of Eq. (73) with respect to S gives an integral relation for f (S) in
terms of Π(δ, S) and the barrier shape. Substituting Π(δ, S) from Eq. (74) into this integral
relation for f (S) gives
                                                    Z S
                               f (S) = G(S) +             f (S ′ )H(S, S ′ )dS ′ ,            (75)
                                                     0

where G(S) ≡ [B(S)/S − 2dB(S)/dS]Ψ(B(S), S), H(S, S ′) ≡ [2dB(S)/dS − (B(S) −
B(S ′ ))/(S − S ′ )]Ψ(B(S) − B(S ′ ), S − S ′ ), and H(S, S ′ ) = 0 if S ′ > S.
   Equation (75) is an integral equation for the first-crossing distribution of f (S). Equa-
tion (75) has the variable S as a limit of integration, and the unknown function of interest
f (S) both under and outside the integral. This is the form of a Volterra Equation of the sec-
ond kind. This equation can be solved numerically using standard methods (e.g., Ref. [76]).
The first step is to discretize the integral on an interval from 0 to S. The simplest approach
is to choose a uniform step in S. Let n = 1, 2, ..., N, ∆S = S/N, Sn = n∆S, fn = f (Sn ),
Gn = G(Sn ), and Hn m = H(Sn , Sm − ∆S/2). Then, the integral can be rewritten as
                                                                      N
                                                                  ∆S X
              Z Sn
                      f (S ′ )Ψ(δ − B(Sn ), Sn − S ′ )dS ′ ≃             Hnm [fm + fm−1 ],    (76)
                0                                                  2 m=1
so that                                 Pn−1
                           Gn + ∆S/2(        m=1 Hnm [fm + fm−1 ] + H(n, n)fn−1 )
                    fn =                                                                      (77)
                                              1 − (∆S/2)H(n, n)
with the exceptions

                                f0 = G0    and
                                     G1 + (∆S/2)H(2, 1)[f1 + f0 ]
                                f1 =                              .
                                         1 − (∆S/2)H(2, 2)
                                                                                                 48




FIG. 15: The first-crossing distribution for the quadratic barrier B(S) = δc +0.5S 2 . The histogram
is the result of a Monte Carlo construction of the distribution while the smooth, solid line is the
iterative solution to the Volterra equation [Eq. (75)] described by Zhang & Hui [75].



The values fn can be constructed iteratively based on Eq. (77). Utilizing Eq. (77) as a
solution for Eq. (75) is generally a more efficient method to obtain a precise estimate for
f (S) than computing a large ensemble of trajectories.
   As a simple example of this approach, I show the first-crossing distribution of the barrier
B(S) = δc + 0.5S 2 in Figure 15. The histogram is the first-crossing distribution constructed
from 105 Monte Carlo trajectories, while the smooth line is the iterative solution to Eq. (75)
in Eq. (77). The two solutions are clearly in good agreement. Note also that the first-
crossing distribution declines more rapidly at high S (small mass) than the first-crossing
distribution for the linear barrier. This is a natural consequence of the fact that the barrier
height grows more rapidly with respect to the variance than in the linear case so that the
barrier is even more difficult to penetrate at high S.
                                                                                                   49




FIG. 16: Correlated random walks. The thin, solid lines show five examples of correlated random
walks of δ(S) defined with a Gaussian filter in the left panel and a tophat filter in the right panel.
These trajectories were constructed from five integrations of the Langevin equation [Eq. (78)] in
each case. The thick line represents a threshold at δ = δc . The trajectories in this figure have been
selected to pierce the barrier at S < 10 which is why they all tend to lie in the upper half plane.
Notice that these trajectories vary smoothly, unlike the uncorrelated case.



                               C.   Correlations Between Scales


   As I described in § IV, the standard implementation of the excursion set theory makes
use of a density contrast field filtered with a k-space tophat window function. This choice of
a filter that is local in Fourier space requires that the mass that collapses onto a halo is not
local in configuration space. In fact, the previous sentence understates the issue. In § IV, I
noted that the use of the sharp k-space filter represents something of a problem because the
sharp k-space window is difficult to associate with any particular mass because its volume
diverges. However, once some method for assigning mass to a filter scale is decided upon,
the use of the sharp k-space filter also has an important implication for the properties of
halos. In the case of a sharp k-space window function, the transitions between different
smoothed densities are independent Gaussian random variables as in Eq. (20). This implies
that the formation histories of halos are completely unrelated to their local environments
because in the excursion set formalism a halo of mass M has δ(S) = δc at S = S(M) while
                                                                                              50

all steps away from this value are independent of each other.
   Though the effects are small, several studies have recently pointed out that the formation
histories of halos in cosmological numerical simulations are correlated with their environ-
ments [64, 77, 78, 79] as are internal properties of halos [78, 79, 80]. The implication of
these studies is that correlations between scales cannot be neglected completely. Though
the impact of these effects on observable quantities has not been thoroughly explored, the
first observation of such an effect was recently presented by Berlind et al. [81].
   Along other lines Sheth & Tormen [42], attempted to determine whether or not their
conditional mass functions were in error because of an incomplete treatment of ellipsoidal
collapse and concluded that a more detailed treatment of ellipsoidal collapse could not ex-
plain the failures of their model to predict conditional mass functions and density-dependent
mass functions. They reasoned that because the worst failures occurred in high-density re-
gions and for conditional mass functions at small lookback times and large mass ratios, the
deficiency may be due to the neglect of correlations between different scales. The reasoning
is as follows. Consider the specific example of the conditional mass function. To compute
the conditional mass function, two smoothing scales are necessary. One scale describes the
parent object while the other scale describes the progenitor halo at some earlier time. At
high mass ratios and small lookback times, the two smoothing scales are quite similar so one
might expect correlations to be important. However, in the low-mass-ratio regime where
the progenitors are much smaller than the parent halo, the two smoothing scales are very
different so that it might not be surprising for correlations between these very different scales
to be relatively less important.
   Correlations between scales can be incorporated into the excursion set approach simply
by modifying the window function. Any window function other than a sharp k-space window
will result in walks with steps that are correlated to some degree. In the case of correlated
walks, Eq. (21) no longer applies and so the results of § IV are not valid. For correlated
walks, the f (S)dS distribution must be computed by integrating numerically a Langevin
equation as described in the seminal work of Bond et al. in Ref. [18].
   The Brownian motion of a particle can be treated by considering the acceleration of the
particle as due to a fluctuating stochastic force F~ (t). The Langevin equation for the particle
motion is d~v /dt = F~ (t), where ~v is the particle velocity (for example, return to the review
of Chandrasekhar in Ref. [23]). In a similar way, the trajectory δ(S) experiences a series
                                                                                                   51




FIG. 17:   The first-crossing distribution of the smoothed density field defined with a Gaussian
window function. The left panel shows the first-crossing distribution explicitly. First the smooth,
upper line is the analytic distribution for the sharp k-space window function given in Eq. (32).
The upper histogram shows the first-crossing distribution constructed by integrating the Langevin
equation for this case and demonstrates that the two solutions are in good agreement. The lower
histogram is the first-crossing distribution for the smoothed density field defined with a Gaussian
window function. The right panel shows mass functions. The smooth line is the standard excur-
sion set mass function. The lower histogram shows the mass function of halos using the Gaussian
first-crossing distribution from the left panel and the S(M ) relationship for a Gaussian filter func-
tion. The upper histogram shows the mass function constructed from the Gaussian first-crossing
distribution of the left panel but using the S(M ) relation for a real-space tophat window function.
The difference between the two histograms represents the effect of the different mass definitions
with a fixed first-crossing distribution.



of stochastic inputs from specific realizations of the different Fourier modes of the density
field. The trajectory for the smoothed density field obeys

                                    ∂δ(S)
                                           = Q(ln k)W (k; RW ),                                  (78)
                                    ∂ ln k

where the variance S and the smoothing scale RW are related through Eq. (14) as usual.
The “stochastic force” in this case is Q(ln k) which is a Gaussian random variable with zero
                                                                                             52

mean and a variance of
                                            dS
                                  hQ2 (ln k)i =   = ∆2 (k).                      (79)
                                           d ln k
A large number of trajectories can be built up numerically by summing a large number
of realizations of the stochastic forces. The algorithm is to select Q(ln k) on a grid of
wavenumbers, to apply the smoothing to each Q(ln k) on a grid of smoothing scales, and to
sum the contributions of each step in wavenumber to construct each trajectory. As before,
the steps in smoothing scale should be sufficiently small that crossing the barrier of interest
on any particular interval is unlikely, so it is often most efficient to use a non-uniform grid
in resolution scale (e.g., see Ref. [18]).
   Figure 16 gives examples of trajectories with correlated steps computed by integrating
numerically the Langevin equation of Eq. (78). The left panel shows trajectories generated
using a Gaussian window function and the right panel shows trajectories generated using a
tophat window function. The most obvious feature of these trajectories is that they do not
exhibit the frenetic variations of the uncorrelated random walks shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 14.
On the contrary, because all of the steps in the trajectory are correlated to some degree, the
trajectories are smooth functions of scale.
   The first-crossing distribution for a set of trajectories with correlated steps can be con-
structed numerically by generating a large number of trajectories like those in Figure 16.
Figure 17 shows the first-crossing distribution for trajectories defined using a Gaussian win-
dow function compared to the standard first-crossing distribution for sharp k-space filtering.
In the range of S corresponding to halo masses of interest, the first crossing distribution of
trajectories defined relative to a Gaussian window is lower than the standard, sharp k-space
                                           > 25), the first-crossing distribution of the trajec-
result. At large values of the variance (S ∼
tories defined relative to a Gaussian filter overtakes the sharp k-space distribution (these
features have been discussed in Ref. [18]). Recall that translating f (S) into a mass function
requires knowledge of the relationship between the variance S and the mass scale M. There-
fore, comparing f (S) for two different filtering functions does not reflect the differences in
the mass function directly because the two different S(M) relations must be accounted for.
In the case of the sharp k-space filter, the definition of mass is far from obvious because
the filter has a divergent volume associated with it. Standard practice is to use the S(M)
relation set by a real-space tophat window function. The right panel of Figure 17 shows the
mass function for the Gaussian first-crossing distribution using both the Gaussian window
                                                                                               53

relation for S(M) and the real-space tophat relation for S(M) so that the effect of changing
the S(M) relation at fixed f (S) on the mass function is evident.


              D.    Halo Formation Times and Environment: An Example


   The excursion set theory using filters other than the sharp k-space filter has been con-
sidered only relatively rarely in the literature, but in light of recent results it is interesting
to ask what excursion set theory might say about the relationship between halo properties,
such as formation time, and halo environments. One can ask what predictions implementing
a window that is localized in configuration space, rather than Fourier space, makes for the
relation between, in particular, halo formation histories and large-scale halo environments.
   Consider as a concrete example the dependence of halo formation time on environment at
fixed halo mass. A simple and physically reasonable way to introduce correlations between
the past formation histories of halos and the environments in which halos reside is to consider
trajectories of δ(S) defined using a window function that is localized in configuration space.
The logic for determining formation times is precisely the same as that in § VII C, but the
probability distributions must be constructed numerically. I show the result of a simple
toy example in Figure 18. The argument is fairly general, but for concreteness, take the
specific example of the formation times of 1013 h−1 M⊙ halos with environment defined as the
smoothed density field on scale of Renv = 10 h−1 Mpc, δenv ≡ δ(RW = Renv ). The calculation
must be constructed numerically from a large ensemble of trajectories so it is necessary to
take a bin of halo mass that has finite extent. For this exercise, I consider halos that make a
first crossing of the barrier δc between 1.3 ≤ Si ≤ 1.4. This corresponds to a mass range of
approximately 1.8∼  < M/[1013 h−1 M⊙ ]< 2.2. This toy model is based on 105 trajectories of
                                       ∼
δ(S) defined using Gaussian filtering so that the steps of the random walks are correlated.
   The left panel of Figure 18 shows an explicit example of a conditional probability for
crossing a second barrier of height ω = δc + ∆ω with ∆ω = 0.5 in an interval of width dS
about S given a first crossing of the barrier at δc in the range 1.3 ≤ Si ≤ 1.4, as specified
in the previous paragraph. Also shown in the left panel of Figure 18 is the conditional
probability for the quartiles of trajectories with the highest and lowest values of large-scale
density δenv . Notice that the conditional probability f (∆S, ∆ω|Si , ωi ) is shifted toward
lower ∆S in regions of low density. Trajectories in low-density regions rise more rapidly
                                                                                             54

in the vicinity of the threshold. According to the logic of § VII C, the consequence of this
is that trajectories in low-density regions generally will achieve higher values by the time
the smoothing scale decreases to include half of the initial mass. As a direct result, these
trajectories will generally correspond to halos with earlier formation times. I show this
explicitly in the right panel of Figure 18. This panel shows the distribution of formation
times computed from the same set of trajectories for all halos, as well as for the high and
low quartiles of δenv .
   Figure 18 shows clearly that introducing correlations between different scales into the
excursion set formalism generally leads to halos in dense environments forming later and
halos in diffuse environments forming earlier at fixed halo mass. The example of Figure 18
described in the previous paragraphs is fairly specific; however, while the magnitude of this
effect varies, the sense of this effect is general and holds for different filter shapes and for
δenv defined on widely different scales. Interestingly, I have computed the environment-
dependent formation time distribution for halos of numerous masses, and the sense of this
shift is independent of the mass of halo under consideration.
   The generality of this result implies that the excursion set theory with a density field
smoothed by a filter that is localized in configuration space will lead to dense regions that
preferentially host late-forming halos and vice versa for regions of low density. The result
stems from the general fact that the conditional probability f (∆S, ∆ω|Si , ωi ) is shifted to-
ward low ∆S in low density regions. There is a simple qualitative explanation for this
behavior. All trajectories are required to pass through the point ωi at Si in order to be
considered a halo of a particular mass at all. Consider beginning a walk at S = 0 and δ = 0.
Trajectories that start so that the large-scale smoothed density is relatively low at some
small value of the variance S must rise rapidly in order to cross ωi at Si . The steps in the
walk or correlated, so that these trajectories typically continue to rise after crossing this
threshold. The opposite is true in high-density regions. On average, trajectories that start
at low large-scale densities, proceed to pierce subsequent thresholds earlier in the walk than
counterpart trajectories with high large-scale densities. This general trend is illustrated in
Figure 19 where I show both examples of trajectories in low- and high-density regions and
a scatter plot of δenv against the rate of change of the trajectories about the crossing of δc
at Si , dδ(Si )/dS.
   The results of this toy model for the environmental dependence of halo formation indicate
                                                                                             55

that the natural expectation of excursion set theory should be that halos in dense environ-
ments tend to form relatively later than average, while halos in diffuse environments tend
to form relatively earlier than average. Excursion set theory with a constant barrier height
predicts this relative trend independent of halo mass. The studies in Refs. [77, 78, 79, 80]
indicate that low-mass halos (M ≪ M⋆ ) that form early should be found preferentially
in high-density environments and conversely for late-forming halos. This is opposite the
excursion set expectation described in the preceding paragraphs. On the contrary, the re-
cent results of Wechsler et al. [78] and Wetzel et al. [79] indicate that in the high-mass
regime (M ∼> M⋆ ), it is indeed the late-forming halos that are preferentially located in dense

environments.
   Wang et al. [82] have recently studied the origin of the link between formation time and
environment using a cosmological numerical simulation. These authors found that low-mass
halos that form early are preferentially in dense environments, in agreement with previous
work. More interestingly, Wang et al. continued to show that the accretion of matter onto
small halos in dense environments is cut off prematurely (relative to excursion set expec-
tations) due to tidal interactions and heating of the ambient environment by significantly
more massive neighbors. The low-mass halos are forced to be early formers because their
late accretion is eliminated in a competition with massive neighbors. Wang et al. propose
this as the origin of the environment-dependent formation times measured in previous nu-
merical studies. Finally, Ref. [82] went on to show that this competition-limited growth is
not important for high-mass halos.
   It is interesting to conjecture that the prediction of the excursion set theory and the
study by Wang et al. [82] can be combined into a global picture that explains environment-
dependent formation times at all mass scales. In such a scenario, the statistics of overdense
patches in the primordial density contrast field would favor a bias toward late halo formation
in dense regions. In the high-mass regime, halo growth would not be limited by competition
in any meaningful way, so this bias would persist in the sense seen by Ref. [78] and Ref. [79]
for high-mass halos in numerical simulations. However, in the low-mass regime, competition
would stifle halo growth, forcing small halos in dense environments to be early formers. This
gives rise to the bias of small halos in dense regions to be preferentially early formers.
   To my knowledge, the issues mentioned in this section have not been addressed in any
adequate way at present. The model I have given here is an incomplete toy model intended
                                                                                            56

to illustrate the method for generalizing the excursion set predictions and to indicate the
sense of the effect that excursion set theory predicts. A more detailed exploration of these
points is an interesting undertaking, but is well beyond the scope of this review.


                              E.   The PINOCCHIO Algorithm


   In closing, I would like to point toward another tool for estimating halo mass functions and
formation histories quickly and accurately. This is the publicly-available PINOCCHIO code
developed by P. Monaco and collaborators [14, 15, 16], [85]. (A similar tool that can be
used to generate mock catalogs of halos rapidly is PTHalos developed by Scoccimarro and
Sheth [83, 84]) The great value of the PINOCCHIO code is that it is considerably less compu-
tationally expensive than a cosmological N-body simulation but predicts halo properties and
formation histories that are in better agreement with N-body results relative to the simple
excursion set approach (for a recent example see Ref. [66]).
   Briefly, the PINOCCHIO code uses an algorithm for identifying halos and halo properties
such as mass, velocity, angular momentum, in particular realizations of the linear den-
sity field. The PINOCCHIO code also contains a parameterized algorithm for building fila-
mentary structures in the density field and for generating the merging histories of halos.
PINOCCHIO creates a particle-based realization of the linear density field in a manner simi-
lar to standard N-body simulations. PINOCCHIO then computes the approximate evolution
of mass elements using a particular truncation of third order Lagrangian perturbation the-
ory (for example, first order Lagrangian perturbation theory constitutes the well-known
Zel’dovich Approximation used to initialize most N-body simulations). As PINOCCHIO is
perturbative, the computation progresses at a fraction of the computational effort of an
N-body simulation. PINOCCHIO groups mass elements together into halos using an orbit-
crossing condition. When the orbits of two mass elements coincide, Lagrangian perturbation
theory breaks down because the mapping from Eulerian position to Lagrangian position be-
comes multi-valued and the density is infinite. At this point, the mass elements are grouped
together into a halo (or perhaps a filament) in analogy with collapse to a point in the
evolution of a spherical tophat overdensity.
   The development of the algorithm and the PINOCCHIO code involves a great deal of detail
and is well-beyond the scope of this review. However, this development is well-documented
                                                                                            57

and the references above provide a good starting point for understanding the calculation.

Acknowledgments

  I would like to thank Jeremy Tinker for making is numerical data available to me for
this review. I thank James Bullock, Neal Dalal, Anatoly Klypin, Andrey Kravtsov, Savvas
Koushiappas, Brant Robertson, Eduardo Rozo, Douglas Rudd, Frank van den Bosch, Risa
Wechsler, and David Weinberg for useful discussions and/or comments on the manuscript.
This review is based on notes for lectures given at the Sixth Summer School of the Helmholtz
Institute for Supercomputational Physics on Supercomputational Cosmology. The Summer
School is funded by the Ministry for Science, Research, and Culture Brandenburg. I would
like to thank the organizer of the Summer School on Supercomputational Cosmology, Ana-
toly Klypin, for inviting me to give these lectures. I thank Anatoly Klypin, Andrey Kravtsov
and Francisco Prada for encouraging me to expand them to the current review. I thank the
Astrophysical Institute Potsdam for hospitality during my stay. This work was funded by
the Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics at the University of Chicago, by the National
Science Foundation under grant NSF PHY 0114422, and by the National Science Founda-
tion through the Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship Program under grant
AST 0602122.




 [1] W. H. Press and P. Schechter, Astrophys. J. 187, 425 (1974).
 [2] R. S. Somerville and T. S. Kolatt, MNRAS 305, 1 (1999).
 [3] S. Cole, C. G. Lacey, C. M. Baugh, and C. S. Frenk, MNRAS 319, 168 (2000).
 [4] R. S. Somerville and J. R. Primack, MNRAS 310, 1087 (1999), astro-ph/9802268.
 [5] G. Kauffmann and M. Haehnelt, MNRAS 311, 576 (2000), astro-ph/9906493.
 [6] E. Neistein, F. C. van den Bosch, and A. Dekel, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints (2006), astro-
    ph/0605045.
 [7] A. R. Zentner and J. S. Bullock, ApJ 598, 49 (2003).
 [8] A. J. Benson, C. G. Lacey, C. S. Frenk, C. M. Baugh, and S. Cole, MNRAS 351, 1215 (2004),
    astro-ph/0307298.
 [9] S. M. Koushiappas, A. R. Zentner, and T. P. Walker, Phys. Rev. D 69, 043501 (2004),
                                                                                             58

    astro-ph/0309464.
[10] A. R. Zentner, A. Berlind, J. S. Bullock, A. Kravtsov, and R. H. Wechsler, Astrophys. J. ,
    624, 505 (2005).
[11] J. Peñarrubia and A. J. Benson, MNRAS 364, 977 (2005), astro-ph/0412370.
[12] J. E. Taylor and A. Babul, MNRAS 364, 515 (2005).
[13] J. E. Taylor and A. Babul, MNRAS 364, 535 (2005), astro-ph/0410049.
[14] P. Monaco, T. Theuns, and G. Taffoni, MNRAS 331, 587 (2002).
[15] P. Monaco, T. Theuns, G. Taffoni, F. Governato, T. Quinn, and J. Stadel, MNRAS 564, 8
    (2002).
[16] G. Taffoni, P. Monaco, and T. Theuns, MNRAS 333, 623 (2002).
[17] J. M. Bardeen, J. R. Bond, N. Kaiser, and A. S. Szalay, Astrophys. J. 304, 15 (1986).
[18] J. R. Bond, S. Cole, G. Efstathiou, and N. Kaiser, Astrophys. J. 379, 440 (1991).
[19] C. Lacey and S. Cole, MNRAS 262, 627 (1993).
[20] C. Lacey and S. Cole, MNRAS 271, 676 (1994), astro-ph/9402069.
[21] R. K. Sheth and G. Lemson, MNRAS 305, 946 (1999).
[22] N. Wax, Selected Papers on Noise and Stochastic Processes (New York: Dover Publication,
    1954, edited by Wax, Nelson, 1954).
[23] S. Chandrasekhar, Rev. Mod. Phys. 15, 2 (1943).
[24] S. O. Rice, Bell Systems Tech. J., Volume 23, p. 282-332 23, 282 (1944).
[25] S. O. Rice, Bell Systems Tech. J., Volume 24, p. 46-156 24, 46 (1945).
[26] D. J. Eisenstein and W. Hu, Astrophys. J. 511, 5 (1999), astro-ph/9710252.
[27] B. G. Williams, A. F. Heavens, J. A. Peacock, and S. F. Shandarin, MNRAS 250, 458 (1991).
[28] S. M. Carroll, W. H. Press, and E. L. Turner, ARAA 30, 499 (1992).
[29] S. Bildhauer, T. Buchert, and M. Kasai, A & A 263, 23 (1992).
[30] R. A. Epstein, MNRAS 205, 207 (1983).
[31] J. A. Peacock and A. F. Heavens, MNRAS 243, 133 (1990).
[32] R. J. Bower, MNRAS 248, 332 (1991).
[33] R. J. Adler, The Geometry of Random Fields (The Geometry of Random Fields, Chichester:
    Wiley, 1981, 1981).
[34] R. K. Sheth and G. Tormen, MNRAS 308, 119 (1999).
[35] A. Jenkins, C. S. Frenk, S. D. M. White, J. M. Colberg, S. Cole, A. E. Evrard, H. M. P.
                                                                                            59

    Couchman, and N. Yoshida, MNRAS 321, 372 (2001).
[36] N. Kaiser, ApJL 284, L9 (1984).
[37] G. Efstathiou, C. S. Frenk, S. D. M. White, and M. Davis, MNRAS 235, 715 (1988).
[38] H. J. Mo and S. D. M. White, MNRAS 282, 347 (1996).
[39] U. Seljak and M. S. Warren, MNRAS 355, 129 (2004), astro-ph/0403698.
[40] S. Cole and N. Kaiser, MNRAS 237, 1127 (1989).
[41] R. K. Sheth, H. J. Mo, and G. Tormen, MNRAS 323, 1 (2001).
[42] R. K. Sheth and G. Tormen, MNRAS 329, 61 (2002).
[43] R. J. Scherrer and E. Bertschinger, Astrophys. J. 381, 349 (1991).
[44] U. Seljak, MNRAS 318, 203 (2000).
[45] C.-P. Ma and J. N. Fry, Astrophys. J. 543, 503 (2000).
[46] J. A. Peacock and R. E. Smith, MNRAS 318, 1144 (2000).
[47] A. A. Berlind and D. H. Weinberg, Astrophys. J. 575, 587 (2002).
[48] V. Icke, MNRAS 206, 1 (1984).
[49] E. Bertschinger, ApJS 58, 1 (1985).
[50] R. van de Weygaert and E. Van Kampen, MNRAS 263, 481 (1993).
[51] R. K. Sheth and R. van de Weygaert, MNRAS 350, 517 (2004).
[52] G. R. Blumenthal, L. Da Costa, D. S. Goldwirth, M. Lecar, and T. Piran, Astrophys. J. 388,
    234 (1992).
[53] S. Furlanetto and T. Piran, MNRAS, in press (2005), arXiv:astro-ph/0509148.
[54] S. Cole and N. Kaiser, MNRAS 233, 637 (1988).
[55] S. Cole, Astrophys. J. 367, 45 (1991).
[56] G. Kauffmann, S. D. M. White, and B. Guiderdoni, MNRAS 264, 201 (1993).
[57] R. K. Sheth, MNRAS 281, 1277 (1996).
[58] R. K. Sheth and J. Pitman, MNRAS 289, 66 (1997).
[59] S. D. M. White, in Cosmology and Large Scale Structure, edited by R. Schaeffer, J. Silk,
    M. Spiro, and J. Zinn-Justin (1996), pp. 349–+.
[60] J. M. Gelb and E. Bertschinger, Astrophys. J. 436, 467 (1994), astro-ph/9408028.
[61] Y. P. Jing, ApJL 503, L9+ (1998), astro-ph/9805202.
[62] G. Tormen, MNRAS 297, 648 (1998), astro-ph/9802290.
[63] R. H. Wechsler, J. S. Bullock, J. R. Primack, A. V. Kravtsov, and A. Dekel, Astrophys. J.
                                                                                             60

    568, 52 (2002).
[64] R. K. Sheth and G. Tormen, MNRAS 350, 1385 (2004).
[65] A. J. Benson, M. Kamionkowski, and S. H. Hassani, MNRAS 357, 847 (2005), astro-
    ph/0407136.
[66] Y. Li, H. J. Mo, and F. C. van den Bosch, MNRASSubmitted, astro-ph/0510372 (2005),
    astro-ph/0510372.
[67] R. K. Sheth, MNRAS 300, 1057 (1998).
[68] P. Monaco, Astrophys. J. 447, 23 (1995), astro-ph/9406029.
[69] J. R. Bond and S. T. Myers, ApJS 103, 1 (1996).
[70] P. Monaco, MNRAS 287, 753 (1997), astro-ph/9606027.
[71] P. Monaco, MNRAS 290, 439 (1997), astro-ph/9606029.
[72] E. Audit, R. Teyssier, and J.-M. Alimi, å 325, 540 (1997).
[73] J. Lee and S. Shandarin, Astrophys. J. 500, 14 (1998).
[74] S. Furlanetto, M. Zaldarriaga, and L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J. 613, 1 (2004).
[75] J. Zhang and L. Hui, Astrophys. J. 641, 641 (2006), astro-ph/0508384.
[76] G. B. Arfken and H. J. Weber, Materials and Manufacturing Processes (1995).
[77] L. Gao, V. Springel, and S. D. M. White, MNRAS 363, L66 (2005).
[78] R. H. Wechsler, A. R. Zentner, J. S. Bullock, A. V. Kravtsov, and B. Allgood, ApJ, In Press
    (astro-ph/0512416) (2006).
[79] A. R. Wetzel, J. D. Cohn, M. White, D. E. Holz, and M. S. Warren, ArXiv Astrophysics
    e-prints (2006), astro-ph/0606699.
[80] A. V. Maccio’, A. A. Dutton, F. C. van den Bosch, B. Moore, D. Potter, and J. Stadel,
    MNRASSubmitted, astro-ph/0608157 (2006), astro-ph/0608157.
[81] A. A. Berlind, E. Kazin, M. R. Blanton, S. Pueblas, R. Scoccimarro, and D. W. Hogg, ArXiv
    Astrophysics e-prints (2006), astro-ph/0610524.
[82] H. Y. Wang, H. J. Mo, and Y. P. Jing, MNRAS, Submitted (astro-ph/0608690) (2006).
[83] R. . Scoccimarro and R. K. Sheth, MNRAS 329, 629 (2002).
[84] R. Scoccimarro, MNRAS 299, 1097 (1998).
[85] The PINOCCHIO code can be obtained from URL http://adlibitum.oats.inaf.it/monaco/Homepage/Pinocchio/
                                                                                                 61




FIG. 18: The dependence of halo formation times on halo environment in the excursion set theory.
The figure shows results derived from trajectories of δ(S) defined using a Gaussian window function.
The left panel shows the conditional probability for making a first crossing of a barrier of height
ω = δc + ∆ω with ∆ω = 0.5, given that the first crossing of the barrier ωi = δc occurred in the
interval 1.3 ≤ Si ≤ 1.4. This corresponds to a mass range 1.8 ≤ M/[1013 h−1 M⊙ ] ≤ 2.2. The solid
histogram shows the full conditional probability distribution derived from 105 such trajectories.
The dotted histogram shows the conditional probability derived from the quartile of trajectories
that have the highest smoothed densities on a scale of Renv = 10 h−1 Mpc. For the purposes of this
exercise, the smoothed density on a scale of Renv serves to define the environment. The dashed
histogram shows the conditional probability from the quartile of trajectories with the smallest
smoothed densities on a scale of Renv . The right panel shows the distributions of formation times
(in terms of the variable ωF ) derived from these trajectories. Again, the solid histogram shows
the mean distribution of formation times for all halos, the dotted histogram shows the distribution
of formation times for the quartile of halos with the highest large-scale densities, and the dashed
histogram shows the formation time distribution for the quartile of halos in the lowest density
environments. Notice that at fixed halo mass, halos with low large-scale densities typically form
earlier (at higher ωF ) than halos that reside in regions that are overdense on large scales.
                                                                                                    62




FIG. 19: Trajectories exhibiting low and high large-scale densities. The left panel shows twenty
randomly-selected trajectories with values of δenv in the lowest quartile (solid lines) and δenv in
the highest quartile (dashed lines). The horizontal, dotted line marks δ = δc indicating collapse at
z = 0. All trajectories represent halos of nearly identical mass so they cross δc at nearly identical
points. The arrow indicates the variance on the length scale Renv = 10 h−1 Mpc which is where
the environment measure δenv is defined. Notice that trajectories with low large-scale densities
tend to rise more rapidly after crossing the threshold at δc . The right panel shows a scatter plot
of large-scale density contrast δenv and the rate of change of δ(S) at the first-crossing of δc at Si ,
dδ(Si )/dS. The inverse correlation between large-scale density and local rate of increase is evident.
