[OCR EXTRACTION of the KEK scan of MIT-CTP-1400 (Farhi & Guth, 'An Obstacle to Creating a Universe in the Laboratory', submitted to PLB; published as PLB 183, 149). The OCR layer is NOISY -- stamps, marginalia and equation garbling are present; the PDF scan farhi_guth_mitctp1400_kekscan_2000_36_705.pdf is the pin of record and was read VISUALLY page by page (2026-08-30, Tori). This text exists for greppable receipts only.]

=== scan page 1 ===
~ 
6o 
' 
/'(\ 
AN OBSTACLE TO CREATING 
A UNIVERSE IN THE LABORATORY• 
"..)<b.. _,;· 
,_. 
Edward Farhit 
\.) 
Center for Theoretical Physics 
'looo- 3 b- ?os 
t""""J<:-:-:::;- - ·-····-
1 t !J;T ·"! -"'~ .. ·, 
laboratory for Nuclear Science and Department of Physics 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge. Massachusetts 02139 
U.S.A. 
and 
Alan H. Gutht 
Center for Theoretical Physics 
Laboratory for Nuclear Science and Department of Physics 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 
U.S.A. 
and 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
60 Garden Street 
Cambridge. Massachusetts 02138 
U.S.A. 
Submitted to: Physie8 Letters B 
Typeset in TE:X by Roger L. Gilson 
CTP # 1400 
Octobe< 1986 
* This work is supported in part by funds provided by the U. S. Department of 
Energy (D.O.E.) under contract # DE-AC02-76ER03069. 
t Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellow 
! This work is supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA) under contract NAGW-553. 
\ 
AN OBSTACLE TO CREATING 
A UNIVERSE IN THE LABORATORY 
Edward Farhi 
and 
Alan H. Guth 
ABSTRACT 
We show that any spherically symmetric false vacuum bubble which forms 
in an asymptotically flat space and grows beyond a certain critical size must 
have emerged from an initial singularity. Our result requires that the energy-
momentum tensor obey the condition Tp.vk"kv ;::: 0 for all null k". a property 
which holds at the classical level for almost all theories of matter. For the 
nonspherical case. we state a necessary condition that a false vacuum bubble 
must meet in order to avoid an initial singularity. We do not know if this 
condition can ever be met. The requirement of an initial singularity appears 
to be an insurmountable obstacle to the creation of an inflationary universe 
in the laboratory. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The universe which we observe today was once much smaller. According to the 
inflationary model. the observed universe grew out of a region with a spatial size of less 
than w- 24 em and a mass of less than 10 kg. The interior of this region consisted of 
metastable "'false vacuum"'. characterized by a positive energy density and a negative 
pressure. The region grew exponentially with time for about w-30 sec or more. until 
the false vacuum decayed. Since the inflationary epoch the universe has continued to 
expand. evolving in a manner well-described by standard big bang cosmology. 
Since the inflationary model makes it possible for the universe to evolve from such 
a modest embryo. it is natural to ask whether we can create conditions in a small region 
of space which could give rise to a new universe. Suppose that a finite region of space. 
say the inside of a cauldron. has been arranged to be in a false vacuum state. Can 
this false vacuum region undergo exponential expansion to become a ~child universe". 
with a future evolution similar to that of our own universe? 
Unfortunately, the formation of a false vacuum requires an energy density that 
is far too high to be provided by any known technology. However, one may still ask 
whether it is in principle possible to create a universe by man-made processes. We 
find this question intriguing, and the analysis is possibly relevant to the early history 
of our universe. 
The evolution of a region of false vacuum has been calculated (1---4) for an ide-
alized system: a spherical bubble of false vacuum separated by a thin wall from an 


=== scan page 2 ===
r=o 
non singular 
r = o singular 
~ 
r=o ~ 
singular 
Fig. 1. 
A spacetime diagram of a sample false vacuum bubble solution. An-
gular coordinates are suppressed. and light! ike lines travel at 45°. The bubble 
wall is shown as a heavy line with an arrow on it. The true vacuum region 
is to the right of the wall. where the metric describes part of Schwarzschild 
space. shown in Kruskal coordinates. The false vacuum region is to the left. 
where the metric describes part of de Sitter space. It is shown using peculiar 
coordinates chosen to join smoothly to the Schwarzschild region. The lower 
wiggly line indicates the initial singularity. and the upper wiggly line indicates 
the final singularity. 
infinite region of true vacuum (T}<v = 0). In the true vacuum region the geometry is 
Schwarzschild. with the mass parameter determined by the combined energy of the 
bubble and the wall. Inside the bubble the geometry is de Sitter. with the cosmological 
constant determined by the false vacuum energy density. The equations of motion for 
the wall are found by requiring that the Einstein equations hold at the boundary [5]. 
The solutions of these equations have various properties depending on the initial 
conditions. but we will focus on those solutions for which the bubble grows without 
bound. An example of such a solution is shown in Fig. 1. 
Although the figure does not make it evident, the proper volume of the de Sitter 
region and the proper area of the bubble wall both grow rapidly as time (i.e .. the 
vertical coordinate of the diagram) increases. Nonetheless the expanding new universe 
does not encroach upon the -outside" true vacuum region. The non-Euclidean nature 
of the geometry allows the child universe to expand at no cost to the parent universe, 
and thus we would not be destroyed by a universe that we might create. To an observer 
in the true vacuum region the bubble wall is always inside the Schwarzschild horizon. 
and the newly created universe appears as a black hole. Only the earliest stages of the 
bubble evolution are in principle observable. 
Taking these known solutions as a guide. it seems that the creation of a universe 
2 
~· 
is necessarily associated with the production of a black hole. This. however. does not. 
in principle present an insurmountable obstacle. Ordinary materials (e.g. stars) can.-~-... 
collapse to form black holes. and it is possible at least to conceive of a laboratory 
setup that would produce a black hole. 
However. there is one feature of the known solutions that must be avoided if we are 
to imagine creating a child universe- all of the solutions for which the bubble grows (} 
without limit have the property that the bubble is associated with an initial singularity. j~" 
as in Fig. 1. This singularity is a spacelike boundary to the manifold. where any past 
directed geodesic which intersects it terminates. Such a singularity cannot conceivably 
be produced in the laboratory, since it has no prior history whatever. In the standard 
big bang model one hypothesizes that the universe originated from such an initial 
singularity, but we do not know of any initial singularities available in the universe 
today. (The black hole created in association with the child universe also has a final 
singularity- i.e., a boundary resulting in the termination of future directed geodesics. 
This singularity does not trouble us. however. since singularities of this type can be 
created by the collapse of ordinary matter.) 
We would therefore like to know whether it is possible to avoid the initial singu-
larity. By introducing some kind of "machinery" to complicate the evolution. can we 
start from nonsingular initial data and grow an arbitrarily large child universe? Un-
fortunately. the answer seems to be no. It appears that the outward velocity required 
for unlimited growth is so large that such a bubble can originate only from an initial 
singularity. In the next section we show that any child universe which grows beyond 
a certain size and approaches spherical symmetry must be associated with an initial 
singularity. Our proof uses a singularity theorem of general relativity first derived by 
Penrose. In section Ill we study the much more difficult case of configurations without 
spherical symmetry. Here we cannot be decisive. but we state a necessary condition 
that a geometry must satisfy in order to avoid an initial singularity. This condition 
seems rather difficult to satisfy. and even if it is met it does not guarantee the absence 
of a singularity. Finally. we discuss our conclusions in section IV. 
II. 
SPHERICALLY SYMMETRIC CHILD UNIVERSES 
Throughout this paper we assume that the interior of our "cauldron" is precisely 
in a false vacuum state, which means that the energy-momentum tensor is given by 
T"" = -ptg"" , 
(1) 
where p 1 denotes the energy density of the false vacuum. assumed to be positive. The 
Einstein equations then take the form 
R}<v = 3X2U}<v , 
(2) 
where 
2 
8,-
x = 3Gp1 
(3) 
In this section we also assume that the false vacuum region is spherically symmetric. 
We do not require spherical symmetry for the parent universe. however. provided that 
3 


=== scan page 3 ===
the spherical symmetry of the false vacuum region is not perturbed. The analogue of 
BirkhofT's theorem then implies that the geometry for the false vacuum region is a part 
of de Sitter space. 
To show that in this case the initial singularity is unavoidable. we begin by showing 
that de Sitter space contains 2-spheres that are "anti-trappecr. We call a compact 
two dimensional surface anti-trapped if it has the property that both the inward and 
outward going sets of light rays. emanating normally from the surface. are diverging 
at every point on the surface. (If both sets of rays are converging at every point. the 
surface is called "trapped".) This result can be understood intuitively by viewing de 
Sitter space as an expanding space. with geodesics tending to move apart. It is natural. 
say in flat space. for the outward going light rays normal to a 2-sphere to be diverging. 
and for the inward going light rays to be converging. In an expanding space. however. 
the inward going light rays are pulled outward by the expansion, and this expansion 
can overcome the inward motion and lead to divergence if the 2-sphere is sufficiently 
large. This is what happens in de Sitter space. 
We will describe de Sitter space. as well as other geometries. by using coordinates 
which are tailored to our purposes. 
To construct the coordinates. choose a spacetime point P and in the neighborhood 
of P construct locally flat conventional spherical coordinates (t, r, 8, rp). where t = 
r = 0 is the point P. For each (8, rp) there is a future directed null geodesic leaving P 
headed in the (8, rp) d'rrection. Scale the affine parameter of each geodesic so that it 
equals r in the neighborhood of P. and continue to call the affine parameter r as the 
geodesics extend beyond the neighborhood of P. The coordinates (r, 8, rp) now label 
a three dimensional subspace which goes beyond the neighborho~d of P as far as the 
geodesics can be followed. For fixed r the surface labelled by {8, rp) is a 2-surface. 
From each point on this 2-surface. there is an inward directed null geodesic emanating 
normally from the 2-surface. Call the affine parameter along each of these geodesics v. 
with v = 0 being the point of departure from the surface. There is still an arbitrariness 
in the scale of v. which we fix by requiring that n ·l = -1 at v = D. where n~' = ax~' jar 
is the tangent vector to the outward directed null geodesic x~'(r). and l~' = 8x"" jav is 
the tangent vector to the inward directed null geodesic x~'(v). This construction gives 
good coordinates at least for v near zero and as long as the geodesics parameterized 
by r (at v = 0) can be followed and do not cross. 
For the special case of de Sitter space, the metric in the coordinates (r, v, 8, rp) 
is found to be 
ds 2 = -2dr dv + [r- ~ (1- x 2r 2) r 
(&P + sin2 8 drp
2
) 
(4) 
This metric can be found by starting with any familiar de Sitter space coordinates 
and metric and then explicitly solving for the null geodesics described in the previous 
paragraph. Alternatively. it suffices to check that the metric (4) satisfies (2) as well 
as the stated coordinate conditions. 
Given the metric. it is easy to calculate the divergences of the inward and out-
ward going null geodesics leaving the 2-sphere r = constant. v = 0. 
The four-
velocity vectors for these geodesics are given respectively by £11- = (0, 1, 0, 0) and 
4 
n~' = (1, 0, 0, 0). so one has 
and 
I 
Bin= v ,.l""]to=O = r~tolv=O =-;(I- r2x2) 
2 
8out =: '\7 ,.n""lv=O = f~,.lv=O = r 
(5) 
(6) 
We see that the inward going light rays become diverging for r > tjx. Thus, for 
r > t/x the 2-spheres of fixed rare anti-trapped. 
We can now use the Penrose theorem (7] (or see for example ref. (6]. p. 239) 
to tell us when the existence of an anti-trapped surface necessarily implies an initial 
singularity. This theorem states that in a connected spacetime, if 
a) there exists a noncompact Cauchy surface. 
b) 
RJ<vk~'kv ~ 0 for all null k~'. and 
c) there exists an anti-trapped surface. 
then there exists an initial singularity. For the purposes of this theorem. an "initial 
singularity" is defined as the existence of at least one past directed null geodesic 
which cannot be extended beyond some finite range of its affine parameter. (For a 
precise definition of "inextendible", see ref. (6]. p. 193. In detail. the theorem states 
that at least one past directed null geodesic cannot be extended beyond an affine 
length of 2/8min· where Bmin is the minimum value of the divergence of the inward and 
outward going null geodesics.) We stated the theorem in an unconventional form. using 
anti-trapped surfaces and initial singularities. while the usual statement has trapped 
surfaces and final singularities. Our statement. however. is easily seen to be the time 
reversal of the usual statement, since a future directed diverging set of null geodesics 
is also a past directed converging set. 
We assume that the laboratory which is to produce the false vacuum bubble exists 
in a space which is asymptotically flat. If we further assume that the space has a well-
defined Cauchy development. then the Cauchy surfaces are noncompact and condition 
(a) is satisfied. The relevance of this assumption to our own universe will be discussed 
in the last section. 
As a consequence of the Einstein equations. condition (b) can be cast as a con-
dition on the energy momentum tensor: TJ<vk""k'"' ~ 0 for all null k~'. We call this the 
-very weak energy condition" since it is less restrictive than the usual weak energy 
condition. TJ<vt~'t"' 2: 0 for all timelike t~'. Inside the bubble. where T,.~.~ is proportional 
to 9J.W· the very weak energy condition is clearly satisfied. Outside the bubble. it is a 
condition on the matter distribution which says that the energy density plus any of the 
principal pressures is greater than or equal to zero. Any standard theory of matter in 
its classical approximation obeys the weak energy condition. and hence also the very 
weak condition. (The only familiar type of theory that leads to a violation of the very 
weak energy condition at the classical level is that of a scalar field coupled nonmini-
mally to gravity. that is. with an R¢2 term in the Lagrangian.) We therefore make the 
5 


=== scan page 4 ===
reasonable assumption that the machinery to be used in the construction of the child 
universe will obey the very weak energy condition. thereby satisfying condition (b). 
For a spherically symmetric child universe we can describe the bubble interior by 
the metric ( 4). placing r = 0 at the center of the bubble. If the bubble is large enough 
so that this metric is valid for some r larger than I/x. then an anti-trapped surface 
exists. In this case an initial singularity is unavoidable. 
Thus. singular initial conditions are required to produce any child universe which 
at some late time approaches spherical symmetry or has a spherically symmetric region 
which can be described by the metric (4) for some r > Ijx. (Again. we assume that 
the very weak energy condition holds and that the parent universe is asymptotically 
flat.) Since small perturbations away from a de Sitter space metric tend to diminish 
at large times (8.9]. it is doubtful that a small deviation from spherical symmetry will 
be enough to avoid the necessity of singular initial conditions. 
Finally, we must discuss whether a singularity as defined by the Penrose theorem 
poses an insurmountable obstacle to the creation of an inflationary universe. The 
situation was simpler for the known exact solutions. since in those cases the r = 0 
hypersurface could be taken as a spacelike boundary to the manifold. providing an 
initial hypersurface for which there was no prior history. When one is relying on the 
Penrose theorem. on the other hand. one knows only that there exists at least one null 
geodesic which cannot be continued arbitrarily far into the past. This means. however. 
that the history of this geodesic is incomplete. and the presence or absence of a light 
ray traveling along the geodesic cannot be determined by initial conditions set prior 
to the earliest time along the geodesic. We conclude. therefore, that such a situation 
cannot arise by well-behaved Cauchy development from smooth initial conditions. and 
thus it seems reasonable to regard this kind of a singularity as an insurmountable 
obstacle. 
Ill. 
CHILD UNIVERSES WITHOUT SPHERICAL SYMMETRY 
In the spherically symmetric case we constructed 2-spheres by following, out to 
a fixed affine parameter r. the light rays emanating in all directions from a spacetime 
point P. We could show that for large enough r these 2-spheres are anti-trapped 
surfaces. To do so we used the fact that the metric is that of de Sitter space. which 
for our choice of coordinates has the form (4). 
An arbitrary false vacuum bubble will satisfy the Einstein equations (2). but these 
equations do not determine the metric without further information. The matter dis-
tribution outside the bubble affects the metric inside the bubble. whereas the local 
conditions (2) are maintained as long as the false vacuum region is empty. 
Nonetheless. it is tempting to conjecture that if a large enough region of spacetime 
obeys eq. (2). then it will contain an anti-trapped surface. Unfortunately. we have not 
been able to establish this result. However. we can show that if eq. (2) holds in a 
sufficiently large region. then one can construct a 2-surface for which the average of 
the divergence of the inward directed null geodesics normal to the surface is positive. 
To derive this result we again look at 2·surfaces defined by following the light rays 
emanating from some fixed point Pout to a fixed value of the affine parameter. To do 
so it is convenient to establish the coordinates (r, v, 9, cp) by following the prescription 
6 
given in the last section. This prescription leads to a coordinate system in which the 
metric has certain properties. Since f.JJ. = (0, I, 0, 0) is a geodesic. lcz'il QlJJ. = 0: and 
since rand v are coordinates, na'il cz_l~' = lQ'il an", where nJJ. = (1, 0, 0, 0). Together, 
these imply that~ 9rv = 
l~''il JJ.(n ·l) = 0: since 9rv = -1 at v = 0. it follows that 
9rv = -1 everywhere. By similar arguments one can show that 9vv = 9v8 = 9v<p = 0 
everywhere. The metric in the (r, v, 8, rp) coordinates has the form: 
[
g .. 
-1 
9p.v = 
9rB 
g,,. 
-1 
9r8 
0 
0 
0 
988 
0 
98t;> 
g~,. ]· 
g,,. 
g,.,. 
(7) 
We can use the fact that n is a geodesic at v = 0 to show that fr Yre(v = 0) = 0. 
Since for r small and v = 0 the metric takes its flat space form with 9r8 = 0. we see 
that 
9r8(v = 0) = 0 , 
(Sa) 
and similarly 
g,,.(v = 0) = 0. 
(8b) 
Also. note that eq. (7) implies that the determinant lgl = g(2). where gC2) is the 
determinant of the two-dimensional metric 9ii with (i, j) = (8, cp). 
Now look at the (i, j) = (9, rp) component of eq. (2). The Ricci tensor Rt; can 
be decomposed into the two dimensional Ricci tensor Rif) (constructed from the two 
dimensional metric 9ii) and a remainder~;· (It is useful to note that. given the metric 
(7). gii depends only on 9i;-) Contracting eq. (2) with gii gives 
6xz = R(2) + giiR~; ' 
(9) 
where R(2) is the two-dimensional curvature scalar. Evaluating R!,- at v = 0 gives 
_1_ !'_ !'_ y'g{2) _ 
2 
R(2 ) 
1 
( .. 
y'gW iir iiv 
g - 3X -
- 2- + 2Vif"iii; g''g;,,.y'gW) 
(10) 
1 .. 
+ 4g'J9ir,v9jr,v 
(v = o) . 
Following Hartle and Wilkins [10]. we integrate this equation over the 2-surface 
r = constant. v = 0. First. the integral of the scalar curvature R(2) over the 2-surface 
is 81r by the Gauss-Bonnet theorem. The next term is a total divergence and vanishes 
upon integration. The last term is positive so we get the inequality 
iJ 
iJ 
l[ 
2 
ar av a(r,v 
v=O ~ 3X a(r,v =0) -411", 
(11) 
7 


=== scan page 5 ===
where a(r,v) is the area of the 2-surface. Integrating from 0 out tor gives 
: a(r,v)l 
2':3x 21r a(r,v=O)dr-41rr, 
V 
v=O 
0 
(12) 
where we have used the fact that a(r, v) approaches its flat space value of zero as r 
and v approach zero. 
Now Bin= V' ,.t~']v=O which for our coordinates is 
p.v 
= 
a 
Oin ~ r" I 
I 
.~o .;gw a • .;;wl ·~o 
If we average Bin over the 2-surface we obtain 
(Oin) :0 fsurlace Vif2'J Bin 
fsurla.ce Vif2'J 
~ 
I 
a 
a(r,v) ava(r,v)lv=O 
which combines with (12} to give 
3x
2
r [11" 
4w l 
(Oin) ~ ( 
) -
a(r,v ~ O)dr- -
2 
a r, v- 0 
r 
0 
3x 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
Imagine following the light rays emanating from some point P out to affine pa-
rameter r. and for each r compute the area a.(r) of the 2-surface of fixed r (for v = 0}. 
We assume that a(r) increases since we are following outward going light rays in an 
expanding space. When the value of a(r) averaged over r, i.e. 
~ J; a(r)dr, exceeds 
47r)3x2 • we know that {6;n). the average of 6;n over the 2-surface of fixed r, is posi-
tive. For de Sitter space this happens at r = 1/x and the inequality (15) is actually 
an equality. 
In order to apply the Penrose theorem (in its anti-trapped form) we need to know 
that Bin is positive everywhere on a 2-surface-- it is not enough for the average to 
be positive. 
(We assume that Bout is positive everywhere on the 2-surface. since 
outward moving null geodesics are naturally diverging.) However, to show that an 
initial singularity exists we need to find only one anti-trapped surface. In order to 
avoid an initial singularity. the false vacuum region must have the property that for 
each point P, all of the associated 2-surfaces of constant r have some point where 6;u 
is negative. even though the average of B;n over the 2-surface is positive. for r large 
enough. This property still does not guarantee the absence of an initial singularity: it 
is a necessary condition only. We have not succeeded in finding a geometry which has 
this property. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
As you may have imagined. it is rather difficult to create a new universe in the 
laboratory. Assuming that the very weak energy condition holds. then any spherically 
symmetric child universe that is created in a asymptotically flat parent universe is 
8 
associated with an initial singularity. The same appears to be true for child universes 
without spherical symmetry, although we have not excluded the possibility that the 
singularity might be avoided by a sufficiently weird bubble geometry. 
Since the big-bang description of our universe begins with an initial singularity. 
we should ask whether the creation of a child universe requires a new singularity in 
addition to the big bang. In addition. we should ask whether our results can be applied 
if our universe has compact Cauchy surfaces. as would be the case if the universe 
were closed. The answer to both questions appears to be yes, for similar reasons. 
We imagine that the laboratory which produces the false vacuum bubble is very small 
compared to the Hubble length. and is to accomplish its mission in a time which is 
very short compared to the Hubble time. The cosmological spacetime curvature is then 
very small on the relevant scales of length and time. Although a high energy density 
is obviously necessary for the the creation of a false vacuum bubble. we nonetheless 
assume that the energy used to construct and operate the laboratory was initially 
very dilute- the high density is obtained by compressing a modest amount of energy 
into an incredibly small volume. Thus. prior to this compression the perturbation in 
the spacetime metric was extremely small. and the spacetime was well-approximated. 
on the scale of the laboratory. by one which is Minkowskian both at large distances 
and at early times. Since the requirement of an initial singularity would preclude the 
creation of a child universe in such an asymptotically Minkowskian background. it 
seems reasonable to infer that the same conclusion would apply in the background 
provided by our own universe*. 
Finally. our entire discussion has been in the context of classical general relativity. 
There is always the possibility that quantum mechanics could help us avoid a classical 
singularity. In particular, the quantum expectation value of the energy momentum 
tensor will not in general obey the very weak energy condition. We are presently 
investigating this and other routes to nonsingular. quantum universe creation. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Laurence Abbott. Steven Blau, Sidney Coleman. Eduardo 
Guendelman. and Jemal Guven for helpful discussions. and we would like to particularly 
thank Thomas Roman for calling our attention to ref. [10]. A.H.G. would also like to 
thank William Press for helping in the formulation of this problem. and would especially 
like to thank James Bardeen. Werner Israel, William Unruh. and Robert Wald for 
pointing out the relevance of the Penrose theorem. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Sato. M. Sasaki. H. Kodama. and K. Maeda. Prog. Theor. Phys. 65. 1443 
(1981): 
H. Kodama. M. Sasaki. K. Sato. and K. Maeda. Prog. Theor. Phys. 66, 2052 
(1981): 
* However. if somewhere in our universe there exists a "white hole''. a piece of the 
initial big bang singularity. then the creation of a child universe from such an object is 
not excluded by our arguments. 
9 


=== scan page 6 ===
K. Sato. Prog. Theo•. Phys. 66, 2287 (1981): 
H. Kodama. M. Sasaki. and K. Sato, Prog. Thwr. Phys. 68, 1979 (1982): 
K. Maeda. K. Sato, M. Sasaki. and H. Kodama. Phys. utt. 108B. 98 {1982): 
K. Sato. H. Kodama. M. Sasaki. and K. Maeda. Phys. Lett. IOSB. 103 (1982). 
[2[ V. A. Berezin, V. A. Kuzmin and I. I. Tkachev. Phys. Lt.tt. 120B. 91 (1983): 
also in Proceedings of 3rd Seminar on Quantum Gravity, 1984. eds: 
M.A. Markov. V.A. Berezin. and V.P. Frolov (World Scientific. Singapore, 1985). 
p. 605. 
[3] A. Aurilia. G. Denardo. F. Legovini. and E. Spallucci. Phys. Lett. 147B. 258 
(1984): Nud. Phys. B252. 523 (1985). 
(4J S.K. Blau. E. I. GuendeJman. and A. H. Guth. submitted to Phys. Rev. D. 
(5) W. Israel. R Nuovo Gim<nto 44B. 1 (1966): Erratum: 48B. 463 (1967). 
(6] R.M. Wald. General Relativity (Chicago University Press. Chicago, 1984). 
[7) R. Penrose. Phys. Rw. utt. 14. 57 (1965). 
[8) J.A. Frieman and C.M. Will. Astrophys. J. 259, 437 (1982). 
[9) P. Ginsparg and M.J. Perry. Nud. Phys. B222. 245 (1983). 
[10) J.B. Hartle and D.C. Wilkins. Phys. Rev. Lt.tt. 31. 60 (1973). 
10 
