Classical and Quantum
Gravity

You may also like

Did the Universe evolve?
To cite this article: L Smolin 1992 Class. Quantum Grav. 9 173

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- Black hole formation in a contracting
universe
Jerome Quintin and Robert H.
Brandenberger
- Persistent black holes in bouncing
cosmologies
Timothy Clifton, Bernard Carr and Alan
Coley
- Astrophysical Production of Microscopic
Black Holes in a Low-Planck-Scale World
A. Barrau, C. Féron and J. Grain

This content was downloaded from IP address 168.188.91.189 on 23/08/2026 at 15:05

Class. QuanhunGrav. 9 (1992)173-191. Printed in the UK

Did the universe evolve?t
Lee Smoiln
Department of Physics. Syracuse University, Syrwcuse, NY 13244-1130,USA
Received 9 May 1991

Abstract. A new type of explanatory mechanism is proposed to account for the
fact that many of the dimensionless numbers which characterize partide physics and
cosmology take unnatural values. It is proposed that all final singulariiies 'bounce'
or tunnel to initid s i n p h i t i e s of new universes at which point the &mionless
parameters of the standard models of partide physics and cosmology undergo small
random changes. This speculativehypothesis, plus the conventional physics of gravitational collapse, together comprise a mechanjsm for natural selection, in which those
that produce the most black holes during
choices ofparameters that lead to uni-es
!heir I;f.ri~x
r.&Cted far..IU "12
,Lnjy-e
is a t,~ic..l ~ . e z . b e~f &e eczephlp
that results from many generations of s u a reproducing universes than it follows that
the parameters'of our prresent universe are near a local maximum of the number of
black holes produced per universe. Thus, modifications of the parameters of particle
physics and cosmology from their present values should tend to decrease the nunber of black holes in the universe. Three possible examples of this mechanism are
described. In idation models I show that, given the hypotheses, there is selective
pressure for the very s m a l l values of scalar field selkoupling required for irdation.
ne second cone- theeiiect on changing cheprotan-neutronmass di-erence on the
rate of black hole formation in OUT galaxy I argue that hanging the sign of the masz
differenceresults in a large decrease in the number of black holes produced. Whether
raising it results in a decrease or an increase in black hole production is difficult to
determine because of the intricate physics of the Star formation process. The third
mechanism is that in cold, or tepid, big bang models. changes in the proton-neutron
m a s difference could strongly effect the evolution of the universe as a whole.

-.

1. Introduction
Many, if not most, of the most basic puzzles of particle physics and cosmology involve
problems of the specialness or unnotumIity of the dimensionless parameters that govern fund.mer,ta! phenomena. These inc!nde, on the pa:ticle physics side, the gsuge
hierarchy problem and the strong CP problem, and on the cosmology side, the horizon
problem, the flatness problem, and the isotropy problem [l]. In addition, t,here are
problems which involve both particle physics and cosmology such as the problem of the
cosmological constant (for a recent discussion see [Z]) and the problem of fine tuning
of the parameters of inflationary models (for reviews see [3]) in order that they can
give an account of the cosmological fine tunings [3-71. To this list might also be added
the problem of the neutron-proton mass difference, as this is presently understood to
t This is a revised version of a preprint initially circulated in February 1990.
0264-9381/92/010173+19$~3.50
Q 1992 IOP Publishing Ltd

173

174

L Smolin

arise from the smallness of the light quark masses compared to the QCD scale, and
thus may also he thought of as a problem of a large ratio of scales.
In this paper I would like to present a new approach to these problems. This approach is motivated by the observations that not only do so many of the dimensionless
parameters in particle physics and cosmology take unnatural values, the values that
they do take result in a universe that is much larger, and that contains more structure, than would be the case were these parameters to take more natural values. For
example, for natural values of A, the scalar field self-coupling in inflationary models,
the universe would never be larger than Planck scales or grand unified scales, however
for X less than some small critical value the universe can be 60 orders of magnitude
larger [3-71. Similarly, one may note that it is very largely the existence of stars that
accounts for the tremendous variety of phenomena that we find in our universe. They
are responsible for both synthesizing the higher nuclei and for keeping large regions
of the universe far from thermal equilibrium. Stars, in turn, exist due to at least two
unnaturally large ratios in t.he scales that govern elementary particle physics. These
are the grand unified gauge hierarchy, which is responsible for the ratio of lo4" between the gravitational and the other interactions of nucleons. and the fact that the
neutron-proton mass difference is less than nuclear binding energies. Thus, one way
to put the question I would like to address in this article is: Why are the laws of
physics and the initial conditions of the universe such that stars exist?
0.1. otkz f i ~ d :si the I i t e x ? ~ r etwo opposing u i w s abont ?his kind of problem.
The anthropic principle summarizes a collection of observations: the universe we find
ourselves in is very special in ways that make it more likely that we, or living things
in general, exist. However, it has no explanatory power, given that we exclude explanation by final causes. What is missing is a mechanism to explain why it is probable
that the (or even a) universe similar to the one we see around us exists.
The opposite attitude is that it is only coincidence that the laws and initial conditions are such as to make the universe hospitable to life. This attitude is an almost
necessary consequence of the conjecture that there exists a fundamental theory a t the
Planck scale that uniquely determines all the coupling constants and masses of fields
at all scales. If this is the case then whatever is responsible for the proton-neutron
mass difference cannot be causally influenced by the existence or non-existence of a
large number of stable nuclei, as this occurs at scales 22 orders of magnitude larger.
The main purpose of this article is to show that there is a middle ground between
these two alternatives, i.e. that we can have a scientific and causal explanation of
why the universe is such that stars exist. What is needed for such an explanation is
two things. The first is a theory in which the fundamental constants in the standard
models of physics and cosmology are variable. The second is a dynamical mechanism
under which the expressions of these fundamental parameters in relatively low energy
physics, such as the existence or non-existence of stars, can effect the probability
distribution for those parameterst. I will not provide the fundamental theory which
allows the fundamental constants to change. Instead, I will show that, given some
very general assumptions about how that theory works, there is a mechanism for how
the low energy physics could affect the choices of the parameters that requires only
that certain hypotheses are made about what happens when a region of the universe
collapses t o a spacetime singularity.
t An altemativc possibility is to posit that the psrameters are set by a dynamics which extmhzes a
Lagrangian WIG& depends on a mathematical measure of the structure or variety in the universe 181.

Did the universe evolve?

175

2. A mechanism for natural selection in cosmology

What I would like to propose is a theory of the evolution of the entire universe,
including the parameters that govern its basic physics, via a mechanism of natural
selection. Now, as in biology, an explanation by means of natural selection of the
occurrence of a particular property must have two components: a random component,
by which the parameters that determine this property change randomly, but slowly,
over many, largely similar, systems and a selective component by which those systems
with a particular property are, after some time, more likely t o occur. As any physics in
which the parameters of the standard model change must be new physics, the random
mechanism proposed here is speculative. But the selective mechanism will be based on
known physics. In fact the selective mechanism will simply be gravitational collapse.
The mechanism is contained in the following two postulates concerning the physics
near spacetime singularities.
(ij Each finai singuiaricy is fuiiowed by an initial Singularity, which evolves into a
universe which is spatially closed. An alternative hypothesis, which is equivalent as
far as its consequences for the subject of this paper, is that instead of an ending in
a final singularity, the interior of a black hole tunnels into a new spatially compact
universe. We may note that this hypothesis has been advocated as a resolution for the
problem of information loss in black hole evaporation [9] and has also been discussed
recently in connection with the baby universe scenario [lo].
(ii) Let P be the space of dimensionless parameters which governs the particle
physics and matter content of a set of possible universes. A given universe is then
associated with a particular point p of this space. Let us then postulate that at each
initialsingularity (or the tunnelling event) p changes by asmall random amount. Thus,
there is some probability distribution, P(p,,,, p,,,) which governs the random change
in the parameters. One function of a fundamental theory must then be to give us this
probability distribution. However, to show that it is plausible that a n evolutionary
mechanism acted in our universe we only need to assume that P(p,,,, p,,,)
exists,
and that the average step 6p is sufficiently small.
I n order to show how these two postulates lead to a mechanism of natural selection
I will make one further assumption, which is that we will restrict the parameter space
P to universes that are compact and have positive pressures, so that they always
--.11

^ _ _ _

rccu,,apac.

mL--

ILle'l

---L ..-:
caul "'IIYL.Ise

--, _'

L
.A A-..,
.-,=..-I
-:.._..I.-:&..
AL..^
W l l l I l a Y r a L , c a b OLIC illla' arrlgularlby, all" (ill"* al.

.-:I,

~

least one progeny.
Now, let us consider two functions which may be defined on P. The first is T ( p ) ,
which will be defined to be the expected lifetime of a universe with the parameters p ,
Given my last assumption, this is always finite. The second function is R(p),which
is defined to be the expected number of final singularities for a universe with the
parameters p . This is equal to one if there is only a final collapse singularity, and is
larger if there are black holes Note that both of these are expectation values defined
over an ensemble of universes with parameters p .
It i s to be expected that both of these functions are strongly dependent on p , For
the reasons we have discussed earlier, it is likely that for most p , T ( p ) is of the order
of tplanckand R(p) is equal to one. However, there will be small regions of P,such
as one around the values we find in our present universe, where T(p) > tplanck, andt
R(P)B 1.
t Note that I am not assuming that T ( p ) and R(p) are always so correlated. For my purposes I only
need assume that there do exist local extremals of R(p) where T ( p )is also large.

176

L Smolrn

Now I can explain the mechanism of natural selection which follows from my
premises. Let us begin with an initial universe, which is specified by a random point,
E 'P. For a typical random p,n,tLal,R(P,,,,&~=~)
= 1 and the universe produces just
one progeny, with a slightly different p . Thus, in the beginning the universes exercise
a random walk in P with diffusion constant (Sp)Z/tp,anck.However, eventually this
random walk will wander into a region with R ( p ) > 1, after which many universes
are created in each generation. These universes may be described by a distribution of
points, p ( p ) , in P , whose number continues to increase in number with each generation.
More specifically, we will be interested in p ( p , N ) , which is the distribution of universes
which have been created in the N t h generation, or earlier, and in the normalized limit

Now, we may observe that the following are likely consequences of the assumptions
we have made so far: (i) the limit N i
a3 in the definition of A ( p ) converges, so that
this function is well defined; and (ii) A(p) is peaked around local maxima of R ( p ) the
expected number of black holes.
If the ideas proposed in this paper prove fruitful it will be important to show that
(i) and (ii) do, indeed, follow in an appropriate set of models. For the moment it is
sufficient to assume them and investigate their consequences. To do this, and indeed in
order to connect any results about these multi-universe distributions to observations,
we have to make one final assumption, which is that we are in a typical universe in
the ensemble defined by A ( p ) .
We have a mechanism which will allow us to make non-trivial predictions because
it follows from the foregoing that our universe should have parameters p that are near
a local maximum of R ( p ) , the expected number of black holes. T h u s modifications in
any of the parameters should generally result in a decrease of R ( p ) . Thus, if we can
calculate R ( p ) ,just for p close to the parameters of our universe, we have arrived a t
a prediction that we may expect could be verified or refuted given known physics: the
parameters of pariicle physics are such that most changes in fheir values should lead
to decreases i n the expected number of black holes in the universe.
Note that to verify this predict,ion we do not need to be able to calculate R ( p ) for
all p . we only need to be able to calculate it for p near t o the parameters of our own
universe. I t then becomes interesting to know to what extent R ( p ) is computable in
the neighbourhood of the p of our universe given known physics and astrophysics, 1
will comment on this in section 5. Note also, that because we assume that we are in
a typical member of the ensemble, and hence in a universe whose p is close to a local
extremum, to extract predictions from the theory we need know nothing about the
initial point pinit,a,.Indeed, we need to know nothing about the actual A ( p ) except
that it is peaked around local extrema.
Finally, suppose we knew enough about R ( p ) that we could in fact calculate the
distribution A(p) on all of P. Could we use this information to go further and make
global predictions about the constants of the standard model? This depends on the
nature of the distribution A ( p ) . It may or may not be the case that A@) has two
additional properties: (iii) the final A ( p ) is independent of initial point p l n i t i a , ;and
(iv) A ( p ) is strongly peaked around one global extremum. If we can calculate R ( p )
everywhere, and if it is then'the case that the resulting A ( p ) has these properties,
then we could, in principle, predict the values of the parameters p . Having said this I
would like to stress that, while to compute R(p) everywhere is a difficult problem, it

Did the universe evolve?

177

is only necessary to compute R(p) for p near the parameters of our present universe
t o test, or falsify, this theory.
Before going on to discuss how this proposed mechanism might be applied to
specific problems in particle physics and cosmology I would like to make four general
comments.
First, it is important to stress that here, as in biology, natural selection is not a
tautology. It is a tautology that that which is more stable survives longer. However, to
have a mechanism that has a probability close to one to actually generate structure in
some given finite time, several conditions need to be satisfied. The rate of mutations
must be fast enough that many mutations can take place within the time and space
over which the evolution may be known to have taken place. However, the change in
the expression of the parameters (or genes) due to each random change must be small.
This is because if the subspace of the parameter space P, which leads to universes
with many progeny is very small, and if R(p), the number of progeny, is, within this
subspace, a sensitive function of p, small mutations (random changes in p ) are much
more likely to be successful, i.e. to lead to increases in R(p) than large mutations.
If these conditions are not met, for example, if the random changes are too large
or too infrequent, then although natural selection will operate it is improbable that
any structure significantly far from thermal equilibrium will emerge.
Second, I have argued that the hypothesis of natural selection can have predictive
power even in the absence of a fundamental theory of the mechanisms behind the
random element. However, it is possible that, just as occurred in biology, at a later
date a detailed mechanism for this random component might emerge. This is not as
unlikely as it sounds, indeed the possibility that the parameters of the standard model
are determined dynamically is prevalent in much recent work on string theory (see for
example [ll]),inflationary cosmology [13] and wormhole physics [14]t
For example, suppose that the laws of nature are governed by some perturbative
string theory, perhaps because these are the only solutions to the problemof combining
consistently in a perturbative framework quantum theory and gravity. However, there
may be no physical principle which can select any of these preferentially over any
other. Certainly there is no principle of minimizing energy, as in a closed universe
there is no physically meaningful definition of energy. Thus all perturbative string
theories may be equally favoured, in which case it perhaps makes sense to say that
one is chosen, randomly, at the beginning of the universe.
Alternatively, there has been much interest in recent years in the wormhole hypothesis, within which the values of the dimensionless parameters in particle physics
become dynamical variables whose values involve dynamics at Planck scales [12]. In
such a scenario it would not, perhaps, be unlikely, that when spacetime curvatures
become of the order of the Planck scale these constants could be subject to small
changes.
The third, and crucial, point is that the parameters which govern a phenomenon at

t Linde [13]maker a proposal which in some respects relates to that discussed in this article; the
crucial difference is in his use of the anthropic principle in p l m of the present argument, which is
based on a proposal of an explicit mechanism for selectiw P T ~ S S U T L For the anthropic principle to
work there must exist a universe like o m somewhere in an ensemble generated randomly by the
initid distribution of the scalar field in the inflationary model. whereas for the present argument
to work something much stricter is requirrd. which is that OUT universe be a typical member of an
ensemble whose distribution is determined by the selective rates of reproduction of universes with
diffexnt parameters.

L Smolin

178

some scale should be determined by selective mechanisms acting a t that scale. This is
just a consequence ofnaturalness. This assumption, together with the assumption that
the changes from generation to generation must be small lead us to the conclusion that
there should have been a succession of stages of evolution of the parameters, such that
the parameters that fix phenomena at successively lower energy scales are determined
at successively later stages.
Thus, during the ith stage, the ps will begin in a region R of P associated with
universes that expand until some scale of lengths 1; and densities p i . During this stage
the universes will explore which phenomena may take place at these scales as they
explore 'R. and nearby regions of P. If in these regions there are parameters for which
a universe will produce more black holes than other universes, these parameters will
be selected for. This can occur either through a universe with those parameters living
much longer than Ii/c or by adjustment of the particle physics parameters. However,
in the former case the progeny will then expand to a new scale I;+, > 1;, and a new
stage of the process wiii begin in which phenomena on the new scaie i,, wili be
explored.
If current notions of grand unified theories are correct, these stages might include
some associated with (i) the dimensionality of space, (ii) choice of the gauge group,
(iii) choice of the parameters that lead to inflation, (iv) choice of parameters that
lead t o baryosynthesis, (v) choice of parameters that lead to electroweak symmetry
breaking and (vi) choice of parameters that lead to nucleosynthesis.
Finally, on general grounds, it is plausible that there exist local maxima of R ( p )
associated with large universes with a great deal of structure, of the sort that we see
around us. Let us consider p which have large T ( p )and in addition have the property
that there is a large gauge hierarchy, which is to say a large ratio between t,he Planck
mass and the mass of the lightest stable particle, (In the next section I discuss how
the proposed mechanism might lead to such conditions.) In such a universe, black
holes can only be produced by gravitational collapse, and this requires the existence
of gravitationally bound systems. Thus, for universes with large T ( p )and large gauge
hierarchies, R ( p ) should be roughly proportional to the number of gravitationally
bound systems. Thus, to the extent that the number of gravitationally bound systems
in a universe can be taken as a measure of the 'structure' of that universe, it may be
that this mechanism also selects for universes with more structure.
T-

-...

-._..--

+LA +%I1
:-,, ..An&:-m..
T d:
&I.--'""Y""'~
D S C Y I Y I I D I "IDcuDa
*',lCic

111 U 1 1 S

G*a,,,,K*

1"-

-F

U,

L

'IYW

rL-

LIIC

------I
--:--:-t-ps,re,a,
p,,rrcrpw

stated in this section might work out. I want to stress that what follows are only
very rough sketches of how the postulates int.roduced in this section might be applied.
Whether these ideas are really viable will depend on whether detailed and realistic
models along these lines can be developed which lead to predictions which are falsifiable by observations or experiments.

3. Natural selection for inflation?

The inflationary hypothesis is attractive from several points of view, in that it in
principle eliminates several problems of fine tuning in cosmology, such as the horizon
problem, the flatness problem and the monopole problem [3]. There are several different kinds of inflationary models here, and i t is not my purpose here to review or
assess them. For the present purposes it is interesting to note that in some kinds of
inflationary models the effect can only be achieved if certain dimensionless couplings

Did the universe evolwe?

179

are finely tuned to very small values. From the point of view of inflationary theorists,
this has always been seen to be a liability, and several of the newer inflationary models, such as chaotic inflation, were invented to eliminate this fine tuning problem [3].
However, it is exactly these older inflationary models with fine tuning problems that
I will be interested in here, because they offer an opportunity for a mechanism of the
kind we have just outlined to operate.
There are two kinds of fine tuning problems that one finds in these inflationary
models. .The first of these is that for inflation to occur at all in these models the
self-couping of the scalar field whose vacuum expectation value drives inflation must
take an unnatural value of X , , ,<, i , ,X
in order to avoid the objection of Mazenko,
Unruh and Wald [4,51. The exact value of Xcritiea, depends on other parameters
of the scalar field potential [q,but for typical values it is very small. In addition,
the scale of density fluctuations, Splp, predicted by inflationary models also show a
dependence on X < Xcririca,. In realistic models of inflation this means that if 6 p l p
is to satisfy the constraint which follows from the observed level of isotropy of the
microwave background X must be less than lo-’’ [3, 51.
The second problem is that a mechanism that explains the value of X must explain
not only why it is so small. It must also explain why it is not still smaller. A possible
explanation for this may lie in the dependence of 6 p / p on X just mentioned [3, 5,
141. If 6 p / p is too small then the fluctuations may never become large enough for a
significant number of black holes to condense in the lifetime of the universe. Thus,
the mechanism of natural selection that extremized R(X) may select for a X that is a
compromise between two competing tendencies. If X is too large then infiation does not
occur, or does not last long enough for many black holes to evolve from the fluctuation
spectrum 6 p l p . But if X is too small then the fluctuations may not be large enough to
seed black holes. It is interesting to spetulate whether in the context of a particular
model the mechanism for natural selection that extremizes R might predict a value
for 6 p l p consistent with present limits on the black body radiation [15].
There is a third fine tuning problem that is more general than inflationary models,
and aWicts all attempts to join particle physics with general relativity and cosmology.
This is the problem of the cosmological constant. In the context of inflationary models
this problem becomes the question of why the vacuum expectation value of the potential energy after the last of, perhaps, several stages of symmetry breaking, is exactly
zero? Unfortunately, the problem of the cosmological constant is very difficult, as it
is fine tuned to energy scales which are much smaller than those associated with the
other fine tunings. I have not been able to invent a selective mechanism that might
explain the smallness of the cosmological constant. However, I would like to show that
it is natural to solve the two fine tuning problems which appear in inflationary models
through the selective mechanism described in the previous section.
To see this we construct a simple model of a universe with one scalar field. We
assume that the parameter space P is one-dimensional, and is parametrized by the
self-coupling of a scalar field, A. .We will assume that we are working with a model
subject to the analysis of Makenko el Q / [4] so that inflation is not possible unless X is
very small, say X <
We will also assume that when inflation occurs a universe
blows up to a size,

L ( X ) = F(X)LPlanck

(2)

before recollapsing. The simplest choice for F(X) is that it is equal to 1 for A > Xcritical
and equal to exp(B) for X < Xcritical where R can for a first approximation be taken

180

L Smolin

to be X independent.
We will assume that if a universe becomes big enough compared to LPlanskgravitational clumping occurs during its lifetime, so that it collapses inhomogeneously to
many final singularities. Following the two rules we posited previously, each of these
final singularities becomes the initial singularity of a new universe. The number of
new universes which are thus formed should be proportional to the volume of the
parent universe, when the new universe grows to a scale large enough, and lives long
enough, that gravitational clumping can occur and carry through to collapse. Thus
we will assume that the number of new universes is

and
-”\”,

~

-_
rt[L(>.)jG[+,.!p(*)]

(4)

for L(X) > Lcr,tics,. Here I<[L(X)]is expected to be a monotonically increasing function
of the volume L3 which expresses the fact that, everything else being equal, universes
that are larger and live longer will have more black holes. For example, we might take
in our one parameter model

although a more sopiiisticated model might also involve the temperature of the matter
through L/lJeanS, with
the Jeans length.
The factor G[Sp/p(X)] parametrizes the fact that universe which have a larger
Sp/p will also have more black holes, as 6p/p increases with increasing A this will be
a monotonically increasing function of A.
We then see that in this simple class of models R(X) will have a maximum at
Xcritbol.
In a more general model there is more than one parameter in the scalar
potential, and the expansion factor F for X < Acritical will have some dependence on
these parameters. The maximum of R will, however, still be expected to come from a
competition between the two effects mentioned previously.
‘LOcompiete the definition oi the model, w e need to speciiy the probabiiity distribu’im for the random change in h a t each initial Singularity, the parameters LCritical
a m C and the form of the function I<. The model seems more sensible if we zssume
thai at each new singularity it is 1/X that takes a random step, of 6(l/X) s 1. We must
assume also that there is a reflecting barrier at 1/X = O so that A does not become negahiv . Given this and the other parameters we have a model we can run by numerical
sizx!ztion. Bo~we~ver,
without specifying ?he other parar.eten we can see what ;vi11
happen ger erally when the model is r u n . It is natural to begin the first universe with
an initial A; w 1 so that no inflation occurs. The first universe lives a Planck time, and
then gives rise to a single new universe, with a new A-’. Each new X will involve a
random step of 6 ( 1 / h ) E;: fl. Thus, 1/X undergoes a random walk with a diffusion
constant D = l/t;lanck. Until A-’ > h&,,
each universe lives for a Planck
_. Planck times it will become
time and then reproduces itself. However, after ,.A:,;
probable For X < Xcritica, so inflation will occur. The first inflating universe thus has
A w,,,,X,
and it has many progeny. There will now be a distribution of X in the
progeny, which is originally peaked around h,,,,;,,,. If we continue for an arbitrary

Did ihe universe evolve?

181

number of further generations the distribution stays peaked around Acritical because
R(X) is peaked around XCritica,.Thus, the model predicts that no matter what generation it is, if we live in a universe that inflated we live in a universe with X x Xcritical.
Thus, this simple model makes a prediction, which is that we will observe fluctuations in the universe of the order of 6p/p(Xcritical).This cannot yet be taken seriously;
however it suggests that it might be possible to elaborate this model to the point
where a serious prediction could be made for 6 p / p . To do this we need three things, a
realistic inflationary model, reliable estimates of XCritical in these models and realistic
estimates, based on known astrophysics, for the functions I< and G. We may note
that numerical simulations to determine,,itiX,
as a function of various parameters
in inflationary models have been done [7]t.
4. Natural selection for a small proton-neutron mass difference?

The current understanding of the proton-neutron mass difference is that it cannot
be explained by electromagnetic effects, and must therefore reflect a mass difference
between the up and down quarks. Since (mU4- mdown)/mdownis of order one, the
problem of the proton-neutron mass difference is first to explain why (m, mp)/m, x
(mdawn- mUp)/m, x mdown/mnis a small number. The second thing to explain is
the sign, why m, > mp. I would like now to investigate whether these two facts
could have an explanation in terms of a mechanism of natural selection as outlined
previously.
According to the general ideas described previously, the parameters of the standard
models of particle physics and cosmology are to be determined by selective effects
acting at the natural scales associated with the physics governed by those parameters,
in decreasing order of those scales. Thus, if the proton-neutron mass difference is
to have an explanation via the mechanism of natural selection outlined earlier two
assumptions can be made: (i) the mechanism must involve physical processes a t a
scale of a few MeV; and (ii) we can assume that when this process is important all the
parameters associated with larger energy scales have been fixed by previous stages of
the evolution.
Now, a basic observation is that the existence or non-existence of a large number of
stable nuclei is sensitively tied to the protor:-neutron mass difference. We may recall
that the binding energy per nuclei in helium is 7 MeV, thus, were the m, mp > 14
MeV helium would not bind. Furthermore, the binding energy per nuclei increases by
only one MeV as we go up from helium through all the heavier nuclei. Thus, it seems
very likely that if mn - mp were larger than, say, 18 MeV there would be no stable
composite nuclei. Now the real m, - mp is 1.29 MeV, which is a factor of 14 less
than that. However, we should recall also that deuterium plays a crucial role in the
processes by which the heavy elements were formed, in both the primordial synthesis
of helium and in stars, and deuterium, with a binding energy of 2.23 MeV would not
exist were m, mp twice as big.

-

-

-

t One h a 1 note about idation. According to this generd framework outlined earlier we may look
for a mechanism of selective pressure for each tunable parameter in a given model of partide physics.
Mation is clearly the optimum selective mechanism for tuning parameters associated with sponta
n e o u symmetry brealdng; this suggests that inflation could have occurred in several stages, each
associabed with different symmetry brealdng scaler [Zl]. If there is selective pressure to make the
ratios of the symmetry breakng scales large, the evolutionary mechanism proposed here may be able
to explain the gauge hierarchy problblem.

L Smolin

182

Now, if there were no deuterium (or, certainly if there were stable nuclei besides
hydrogen) then there would be no energy production in stars and no era of nucleosynthesis in the early universe. So the natural question to ask is whether we can find a
mechanism having to do with one or the other of these two processes that, acting in
the context of the two postulates of section 2, would function as a selective mechanism
for the proton-neutron mass difference to be small enough for deuterium to exist.
We begin with the stars.

5. Natural selection for the existence of stars?

To investigate whether there might be a mechanism for natural selection realizing the
scenario discussed above which would involve the existence of stars we are making
use =f hypothesis, \&i& is thzt 0.p' the .&,hole!ifeGme of 0": "ni';erss the
mechanism of black hole production is stellar collapse. Making this assumption, we
then want t o compute R(Am,p), where R is the number of black holes in the universe,
Am = m, mp and p represents all of the other parameters of the standard models
of particle physics and cosmology. We will assume that all of these other parameters
can be held fixed as Am is varied. Further, in order not to rely on global assumptions
about the universe, we would like to calculate not R(Am,p), but the number of blaek
holes produced during the lifetime of the universe per 10" solar masses,the mass of
a typical galaxy, which will be denoted G(Am,p).
Our hypothesis, which I would like to now briefly discuss, is that with the other
parameters fixed, G(Am,p) has a local maximum at the observed Am = 1.29 MeV.
To get started, we will assume that varying Am has no effect on the formation of
galaxies so that we begin with 10" solar masses of gas and dust, condensed into a rotating distribution about the size of our galaxy. Having made all of these assumptions,
it is then clear that the calculation of C(Am,p) is an exercise in stellar physics.
I would like to present a very simple model of how G(Am,p) might be computed.
This model makes several assumptions that I will argue shortly are wrong. However,
by going through the exercise of constructing and analysing this model, we will see
exactly what we will need to know t o make a reliable calculation of G(Am,p). The first
input we need for this model is called the stellar birth rate function, and is denoted
D(p,Am,p,t). It is defined so that D(p,Am,p,t)dp is proportional to the number of
stars in a galaxy that are born with masses between p and p dp at time t . We have
indicated its dependence on Am and the other parameters of particle physics, which
we would like to calculate.
Another function of interest is the present day mass function, which I will denote
P ( p , A m , p , t ) . It is defined so that P(p,Am,p,t)dp is equal to the number of stars
with masses between p and p d p in a galaxy of IOi5 solar masses at the time t .
Given informalion about the lifetimes and evolutions of stars, the two functions can
be related to each other, as is described in [16, 191.
A great deal of work has gone into the measurement of the present day maSS
function, in our galaxy, at the present time. There are also observations which give us
information about this function for a number of other galaxies. A good review of the
state of the art concerning initial mass functions is in [19]. On the theoretical side,
one of the basic goals of the theories of star formation and galactic evolution is to
give a calculation of the stellar birth rate function, from first principles. This has not
yet been accomplished. Thus, for the present we must take for D ( p , A m , p , t )values

-

+

+

Did the universe evolve?

183

which are inferred from observations of the present day mass function. This only gives
us the values of the function for the actual parameters of the universe. This leaves us
with two problems if we are to try to test our hypothesis that G(Am,p) has a local
maximum at the present Am. First, we must be able to deduce something about the
way D ( p , Am,p, t ) changes as we change Am. Second, we must be able to deduce
something about the variation in time of D ( p , A m , p , t ) .
This last question has been the subject of some work by astrophysics. There have
been proposals ihai certain aspects of the observational data can be explained by
attributing certain time dependences to the initial mass function [20].However, there
does not appear to be yet a conclusive argument about this, and it seems that nothing
in the experimental data is strongly contradicted if we make the assumption that
D(p,Am,p,t)is constant in time. I will make this assumption in order to proceed
with the construction of a model, but I will come back in the end to criticize it.
The next input that is needed is a function p(p), which is defined to be the proportion of stars with mass p which will collapse to black holes. Unfortunately, not
very much is known about this function, either theoretically or observationally. It
is clear that for p below the Chandrasekhar mass p ( p ) must vanish, and it is also
considered rather likely that there is a cutoff mass pbh considerably higher than the
Chandrasekhar mass below which p vanishes. This is because a massive star is expected to lose a large fraction of its m a s to m a s loss during its evolution as well as
to supernova before coliapsing to a finai neutron star or black hoie.
Unfortunately, the theory of supernovas is not sufficiently developed to give a
theoretical determination of p ( p ) beyond these schematic comments. Since black holes
are hard to see, there is also little that can be deduced from the observational side.
It seems consistent with present ignorance to assume that there is some mass pcutoR
such that all stars with larger masses become black holes, while all stars with lower
mas?-2 do not. Shapiro and Tellkolsky [IS] take $c"to* to he I@ao!a_r masses: w e
may note that this leads to an estimate that there is approximately one black hoIe per
IO3 cubic ps in our galaxy [16], so that our universe is indeed a prolific progenitor of
black holes.
Let us then construct a model in which a first generation of stars form out of an
initial contracting cloud of gas and dust as the galaxy forms, and succeeding generations are formed from the matter which is ejected or lost by previous generationst.
The number of black holes which form in the first generation is then proportional to,

This is not yet the number of black holes produced during the lifetime of our
universe because massive stars return a large portion of their mass to the interstellar
medium by supernova and mass loss, and this mass then condenses into further stars.
We then need another input to our model, which is the proportion of mass that stars
of mass p return to the interstellar medium. We will denote this by 6 ( p ) . Now, if we

t We may note that in this model a generation corresponds to the number of times that material has
been cycled in s t a q and does not reqlure that the first generation forms all at once, the second
generationat some fixed time after that and so on. This is because we are not interested in calculating
the present day mass function at a given time, but only the number of black holes that are formed
at the bnd of the whole process.

184

L Smolin

normalize D ( p ) so that

is the total mass of gas and dust that goes into the first generation (which means the
total mass that goes into stars at any time during the lifetime of the galaxy), then

is the proportion of that m a s which will be returned by the first generation. Let us
now assume that this returned mass will be recycled entirely into stars, with a mass
distribution given by the initial mass distribution D ( p ) (which we have assumed to be
time independent). Then the total number of black holes produced by all generations
of stars in our galaxy is given by

G ( A m , p )= b ( A m . p ) ( l+ A + A ’ t ...) =

KAm, P )

1 - A(Am,p)’

(9)

We can use this simple model to discuss whether the number of black boles in the
galaxy goes up or down when we change Am. First, let us consider what happens if
we change the sign, so that the proton is heavier than the neutron.
I would like to argue that in this case the number of black holes decreases dramatically. T h e reason is that for star formation to occur at all, there must be a mechanism
to allow the initial cloud of gas and dust to lose energy so that it can condense. For
clouds of hydrogen and helium gas the primary mechanism for such energy loss is radiative transfer. Were the neutron, rather than the proton, to be the lightest baryon,
the galaxy would consist initially of mostly a gas of neutrons, rather than hydrogen.
As the coupling of neutrons to the electromagnetic field is weaker by a factor of a,
the fine structure constant, than the coupling of hydrogen, the process of radiative
transfer, and hence of condensation would be that much slower.
Thus, we may conclude that G(Am < 0) < G(Am > 0). Under the hypotheses
outlined in section 2, this can be taken as a possible explanation of the fact that
the neutron is heavier than the proton. We may also note that this conclusion is
independent of the details of our oversimplified model, it uses only the fact that
radiative transfer is the dominant mechanism of energy loss in Ihe condensation of
clouds of hydrogen gas leading to star formation.
Let us now consider what happens when we increase Am, keeping the sign positive.
The simplest thing to do is to compare t.he present G ( A m= 1.29 MeV) with the case
C ( A m = 18 MeV), in which case there would be nostable nuclei besides hydrogen, and
hence no nuclear fusion. In this case there is no stellar evolution and no supernovas.
Although this does not rule out processes of mass loss arises from pure hydrodynamics,
we will in this simple model neglect those processes, so that we assume that any
condensing cloud of hydrogen gas more massive than the Chandrasekhar mass collapses
to a black hole. Thus, we have p ( p , Am = 18 MeV) = O(p - pChandra).
Since there
is no mechanism for stars to return significant amounts of matter to the interstellar
medium, we have simply, 6 ( p , Am =~18MeV) = A(Am = 18 MeV) = 0.
We will model the throwback function for our present universe by the simple
assumption that every star more massive than some value pSN supernovas, and that
when it does so it returns all but its Chandrasekhar mass to the interstellar medium.

Did the universe evolve?

185

It is my understanding that this assumption is neither strongly supported nor strongly
contradicted by current astrophysical knowledge. We thus have

Finally, recall that for our present universe we are making the simple assumption that
p(p, A m = 1.29 MeV) = O(p - pCutoff).
1n.ord-r t o p:oceed t o - e w h a t e ey~zticn(9) .we x e d to m&e scme ms~rr.p?ion
about the dependence of the stellar birth rate function on Am. We will first consider
the simplest assumption, which is that D(Am,p) is actually independent of Am,
so that in our hypothetical world with Am = 18 MeV it has the same form as is
observed in our present universe. I will postpone a discussion of the plausibility of
this assumption until after we have seen its consequences. For a first calculation we
may use the Salpeter [17]form of the function, which is

where p is about 2.35 [16]. It is then straightforward to calculate
7 w -

G(Am = 18 MeV)
G(Am = 1.29 MeV)

111)

If Nbhp= Jpmu,o,, D(p)dp is the number of black hole progenitors (in our universe) in
the present day mass function we then find that

> pSN > pchandra
we see, first of all, that the first facIf we recall that pcutoff
tor is larger than one; if we take p;,toff = 10 solar masses we have for this factor
about 10. Thus, Z will be greater than unity unless the quantity in brackets is
less than about 1/10. But this is exceedingly unlikely, as for any reasonable values
(psN/MtOtd)Nbhp
< 1 due to the rapidly falling character of D ( p ) . Thus, we conclude

--.."

+h-+
AhAl:n--P--&+..:r. &h-..-..-,...+
Y U O Y Y Y Y LrCJC""&
"I I I I a U I s L
111 Y1.G

p'rrsllu

..-:..--~d-*---+

YIII"CIDT Y Y C U U""

.,-

--La
P - - + hY 'al CC - L- +0 L " +
h-+
1110L\T up ,"I
III0"

many more 'stars' collapse immediately to black holes in the hypothetical universe,
and our hypothesis is contradicted, given the assumptions that went into our simple
model.
Let us now consider the assumptions that went into this model. Besides several
simplifying assumptions, which in any case are within the bounds of present astrophysical knowledge, the main physical assumption that went into this calculation is that
the stellar birth rate function is independent of the neutron-proton mass difference.
Is this a reasonable assumption? I would like to argue that it is not.
In order to investigate this question we have to look into the physics of star formation. The assumption in question would be reasonable if that physics involved only
hydrodynamics and radiative transfer, that is if it involved only collapsing clouds of
hydrogen gas and electrodynamics. However, present understanding of the star formation process is that this is not the case. it is now wideiy beiieved that chemicai
reactions, taking place on the surfaces of the carbon dust grains, play a major role
in cooling the clouds in which new star formation is seen to be taking place (see, for

186

L Smolin

example, [IS]). From this we may conclude that the star formation process, which
determines D(Am, p), depends importantly on the presence of carbon and other organic elements, and hence would be very much altered if Am were increased. This is
not t o say that star formation would not take place were there no higher elements,
indeed such processes must have taken place as all the higher elements are believed
to have been produced in stars. But however that initial generation of star formation
occurred, it w a s not by means of the process of star formation that we see at present.
The important conclusion is that there is no reason for the assumption that D(Am,p)
is independent either of Am or of time.
Is there any way to determine what initial mass distribution would result from
a gas of pure hydrogen and helium? Unfortunately, this cannot be determined by
observation, for in any population, such as the halo stars, which may be the result
of a n earlier mechanism of star formation, all the massive stars are already invisible
remnants, and we thus have no information about the distribution function in the
___:_..
PA_ .I.:_ _ _ I _ _ _ , _ . : - "LA
_ _ I _ . ..._..
2-2--.-:..I L ^ 2 ----.I---^r
reg,u,, U, ,,,bTlC>L ,U, b i l l * CWlCUlab'V'I.
I L L = wiry way b U "ebe,,,L,',c
bUC: uqJm,ul;oc.s U,
the mass distribution function on Am must be through a much improved theoretical
understanding of actual and possible star formation processes.
I would like to close this section with two morals. The first is that to calculate the
dependence of R(p) on the parameters of particle physics in the neighbourhood of the
present values of the parameters will require a level of precision of our understanding of
basic astrophysical processes that has not yet been achieved. However, as astrophysics
is at present a rapidly developing subject, it may be hoped that calculations of this
kind may become possible in the not too distant future. One of the main themes of this
paper is that, under the kind of hypothesis made above, these kinds of calculations,
which after aU rely only on physics at experimentally accessible scales, could play a
crucial role in our understanding of how the parameters in the standard models of
particle physics are fixed.
ml~.
_...
I:
.. l l ~ - .
j
l
-..~.L...! .... ~
~
r r.
~
._I. ~- ~ ~ ,
I ne seconu moral is mac cne mrcnanisms 01 scar iormacion ana galactic evoluiion
are much more complicated than might have been expected. Indeed, the basic probl e m in the physics of galaxies, such as accounting for the different types of galaxies,
or understanding the existence and stability of the spiral arms, are reminiscent of the
kinds of problems of self-organization and stability that one studies in diverse fields
in which non-equilibrium stable structures are of interest. There s e e m to be a kind
of ecology in the physics of the spiral galaxies by means of which the structures responsible for star formation-the spiral arms and the associated clouds of dust and
gas-are maintained for time scales much longer than the^ relevant dynamical time
scales. Indeed, just the facts that star formation is still taking place in spiral galaxies,
and that there is still a considerable amount of matter in interstellar clouds of gas and
dust at a time much later than the relevant dynamical time scales, suggests that there
must be processes of self-organization and self-regularization governing star formation
and galactic evoluiion in spiral gaiaxies. Tnese must invoive sclf-organizing cycles of
materials and energy of the kind that one sees in diverse non-equilibrium systems as
well as in biological systemst.
-.-:..'^_^^I

I^

~

- 1 : - ~ ~

~~~1

t While these problems take us outside the scape of the present paper, we may observe that an
'ecological' approach to the evolution of galaxies is consistent with the basic theme of this paper,

Did the uniuerse evolve?

187

6. N a t u r a l selection during the era of nucleosynthesis

Let us now turn to the question of whether a selective mechanism could have acted
during the era of primordial nucleosynthesis. The question we must then ask is, what
is the consequence of the fermion mass matrix for the overall evolution of the universe
at nucleosynthesis times? The answer depends on whether the universe at the era of
primordial nucleosynthesisis radiation or matter dominated. In the standard radiation
dominated case, the energy-momentum tensor~isdominated by thermal radiation, and
the physics of the baryons will have no effect on the evolution of the universe.
However, cosmological models which are matter dominated for the whole evolution
of the universe have been proposed, and their consequences have been studied in detail
[22]. In these proposals the cosmic black body radiation is.produced during a period
shortly after decoupling, either in a generation of early 'population 111' stars which
L-- --a Ir
-_.a
-..:.i.i.. LA---,.-I
ra-..-~:-lyLlll
uulll
y y L c ~ , J , unyIs
IvIIIIoLIvII, oi as a rexlt of iadiatiori !jy
accretion discs o f black holes which form at that time.
One advantage of these models is that the problem of accounting for the early
growth of inhomogeneities engendered by recent observations of large and early structures is removedt. The problem of nucleosynthesis in these 'tepid' big bang models
has also been studied in detail [23]. It w a s found that there are scenarios in which
helium production occurs at the levels of the hot big bang models. Deuterium production at what are considered acceptable levels is, however, more difficult to account
for in these models. While this problem does not rule out such models, because of
various uncertainties in estimates for production of deuterium after decoupling [24],
it is thought to be a major difficulty which needs to be settled if these models are to
be taken seriously.
Having settled that there are cold big bang models which are not completely ruled
out at the present time we can investigate whether the presence or absence of an
era of nucleosynthesis can have a dramatic effect on the evolution of the universe
in such a model. To investigate this question we may consider a matter dominated
homogeneous cosmology. For the present purposes it will be useful to recall that, as is
well known, the equations of this model are isomorphic to the equations that describe
a homogeneous sphere of self-gravitating matter in Newtonian physics. Thus, let us
consider a homogeneous sphere of radius P,and m a s .V eqznding radia!!y. The tota!
of the gravitational potential and kinetic energy of the sphere is given by,

"....

or, in FRW form,

_Rz
- 3 G M 2 2E 1
RZ - lo-$- +--M R2'
We see that this is the same as the FRW universe with the time coordinate scaled
unconventionally so that IC = - 2 E / 3 M , instead of il or 0. For E < 0 the universe

t The models are also consistent with the limits on anisotropy of the black body radiation, because
the radiation produced by the early stars or black holes is then thermalized by the matter which still
has a shod optical mean free path at this time. Finally, these models provide, in the relics of the
early Itars or black holes, natural candidates for the dark matter.

188

L Smoiin

expands to a maximal radius R, and recollapses to a singularity after a total time T ;
these are given by

3 GMZ
R =-10 -E

Now, the E in these equations is only the sum of the kinetic and gravitational potential
energy. Thus, if at some time to nuclear reactions take place which transfer an amount
of energy A Eper baryon from the mass energy of the particles to kinetic energy, the
total E will change by N A c . What we want to know is the value of E = E / N such
that our universe, with lo*' baryons, can have a lifetime exceeding 10"s. Expressing
T in more natural units we have

Note that the dependence of this quantity on N arises because the total energy (7) is
a sum of a linear and quadratic piece in N . Putting in N = 10" and T = li x lo'& s
we find that E is of the order of 100 MeV. Since the lifetime of our universe could
be much larger than the current Hubble time, this means that it is within the realm
of possibility that in a matter dominated cosmological model a transfer of the order
of 1 MeV per baryon from mass energy to kinetic energy could have an effect on the
evolution of a universe similar to ours. This suggests that it is not impossible that a
mechanism of natural selection, such as the one outlined previously, could have selected
for a proton-neutron mass difference which would lead to an era of nucleosynthesis in
which this order of magnitude of energy per baryon w a s transferred from mass energy
to kinetic energyf
Of course, this model is very crude, for a more detailed model we need to study the
dynamics of an inhomogeneous cosmological model, as pressure can only act to divert
particles from geodesic motion when there are inhomogeneities. The only conclusion
that can be drawn from this simple calculation is that it is not impossible that in a
cold big bang model the gross evolution of the universe could have been significantly
altered by the presence or absence of an era of nucleosynthesis.
Finally, it must be emphasized that the statement that no nuclear bound states
would exist were Imdown
- mupllarger than some value is a hypothesis which needs
to be supported by detailed calculations of the effect on the two nucleon potential of
modifying the light quark masses.

7. Are the g e n e r a t i o n s fossils of earlier universes?

I would like to end with a speculation about how the quark mass matrix could have
changed at each initialsingularity. Suppose that at each new universe one generation of
fermions is added, but all of the old ones remain. Now, only when the new generation is
t WE have ignored both thermal energies and the effect on the gravitational potential energy of the
nucleosynthesis. This is excusable only 85 long as we are interested in an order of magnitude estimate
of <.

Dzd ihe universe evolue?

189

lighter than previous generations will there be new physics. Further, a new generation
will only have a selective advantage if the quark masses are such as to allow for a
spectrum of more than one stable bound state of ‘nucleons’. However, this criterion
is hard to meet. For example, it is not hard to work out what the physics would be
were the second generation the lightest. The stable nucleon would be the R-, and the
gap between it and the next heaviest baryon (the neutral ssc) would be on the order
of mCharm
- mStrange
2: 1 GeV, so that the R-’ would be the only stable nucleon.
Such a universe would consist mostly of ‘hydrogen’ with a pt bound to the R- but
there would be no nuclear fusion and, hence, if the previous scheme is right, no era
of nucleosynthesis, no stars and no supernovas. It is not hard to see that the same
situation would hold for the third generation.
The advantage of such a proposal is that it might explain both why there are
many generations and why the lightest generation is so light. Because there is a
narrow window in quark masses for which nuclear bound states exist, it must have
taken many tries for an appropriate set to be produced randomly. Note, further, that
such a proposal, while ad hoc, is easily falsifiable. An observation of a generation of
quarks such that, were these the lightest generation, nuclear or other processes would
exist which would increase the expected number of black holes, would falsify it.

8. Conclusions

There are many other aspects of particle physics that one could imagine trying to
treat in this way. For example, is the smallness of the neutrino masses due in some
part to the role that they play at the era of primordial nucleosynthesis [28] or in
supernova? And finally and most importantly, there is the problem of the smallness
of the cosmological constant.
In closing, I want to emphasize that the proposal made in this paper is extremely
speculative. Its interest is that it asks us to do something new; rather than trying
to tie all physics to some fundamental theory at the Planck scale the explanation
for why a particular parameter t.akes a particular value is to be sought by asking
how the rate that a universe produces black holes will be altered if that parameter
is chanzed. However, it cannot be taken very seriously unless a detailed scenario
and mechanism, based on known physics, can be developed to explain the value of
a particular parameter which is falsifiable by some combination of experiment and
theory. Whether this can be done successfully remains to be seen.

Acknowledgments

In the development of this proposal I have been influenced by three authors who
made the problem of naturalness compelling to me in a way that suggested its affinity
with the problem of fitness in biology: Greenstein [25], Lovelock [26] and Morowitz
[27]. Yoichiro Nambu [28], in a paper 1 read several years ago, asks the question of
whether there might be an evolutionary explanation for some problems in particle
physics, including the problems of the generations and of the proton-neutron mass
difference. Two lectures, one by Andrei Linde at GR12 [13] and one by George Sparling
at the 1984 Oxford Quantum Gravity conference [29], had the effect of loosening my
imagination about what was possible in cosmology. Finally, in working out these ideas

L Smolin

190

I have had the benefit of criticism, information, suggestions and encouragement from a
number ofpeople including Abhay Ashtekar, Julian Barbour, Herbert Bernstein, Mark
Bowick, John Dell, George Greenstein, Madhusree Mukerjee, Yoichiro Nambu, Jorge
Pullin, Carlo Rovelli, Paul Souder, Ted Jacobson, Robert Wald, Kamesh Wali and the
members of the Syracuse relativity group. This work was supported by grants from
the National Science Foundation, including a US-Italy Cooperative Science Grant.

D i c k R H and Peebles P J E 1979 General Relativity, A n Einstein Centenary Survey ed S W
Hawking and W Israel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Weinberg S 1989 Reu. Mod. Phya.
G u t h A H 1981 Phys. Rev. D 23 347
Linde A D 1982 P h w . Left. 108B 389:' 1982 P h w . Lett. 114B 431: 1983 Phus. Lett. 129B
177; 1983 Phya. i e t t . 123B 177
Albrecht A and Steinhardt P J 1982 Phvs. Rev. Lett. 48 1220
La D and Steinhardt P J 1989 Phys. Rei. Ldt. 02 376;1989 Phys. Lctt. 220 375
Blau S K and Guth A H and Linde A 1987 Three Xlrndred Years of Gravitation ed S W Harking
and W Israel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Linde A D I990 Particle Physics end Inflationary Cosmology (New York: Harwood)
Mamnko G F, U&
W G and Wald R M 1985 Phys. Rcu. D 31 273
G u t h A H and Pi S -Y 1985 Phya. Rcv. D 32 1899; 1986 Inner Spuc/Ottitr Spoec: The
1-trrfnrr
ll""".,l""

R.lr,,r,n

r.4 P W Knlh _.
11 IPhirana. Phi-=--""..._."=~ P-d:.-l* .PA.,.;-.
..""._"
"~Pa.rnfnn.,

nm.4

I..
~I
I..."."

-_ 1
I
.
.
1

r t "1

-.I-

University Press)
Steinkardt P J and Turner M S 1984 Phya. Rev. D 28 2162
Albredrt A, Brandenberger R H and Matzna R H 1985 Phyr. Rev. D 3 2 1280;1987 Phys. Rev.
35 429
Kurki-Suonio H. Centrella J , hlatzner R H and Wilson J R 1987 Phya. Rev. D 36 435
SmolinL Pioc. Osgood Hill Cont. on Concrptval Pioblrms in Quantum Gravity e d A Ashtekar
and J Stadrel (Boston: Birkhauer)
Barbow j E i % G r " w d . Phys. 13 i05i
Barbour J B and Smolin L 1991 Pieprint Syracuse University
DeWitt B S 1981 personal cnmmunication
Wald R M 1984 Qunntlrm Theery of Gravity ed S M Christensen (Bristol: Hilger)
Kodama H. Saraki M,Sal0 K and Maeda K 1981 Prog. Thcor. Phys. 06 2052
Sato K, Kodama H, Sas& M and Maeda K 1982 Phur. Lett. 108B 103
Blau S K, Grendelman E I and Guth A H 1987 Phyr. Rev. D 35 1747
Holcomb K A , Park S J and Vkhniac E T 1989 Phya. Rev. D 39 1058
Horowitz G 1991 Proc. GR1.t ConJ (Borlder, CO, July 1989) ed N Ashby et a1 to appear
Baum E 1983 Phys. Leti.. 133B 185
Hawking S W 1984 Phyi. Lett. 134B 403
Coleman S 1988 Nucl. Phya. B 307 864;1988 Nucl. Phyr. B 310 864
B&
T 1988 Nucl. Phys. 309 493
Giddings S and Slromjnger A 1988 Nucl. Phys. B 307 854
Linde A 1991 Proc. OR12 COB/.
(Bodder, CO, July 1989); 1989 Phya. Lett. 227B 352-8;
1987 Phys. Today 40 61-8;Inflolion and Quantum Cosmology (Boston: Academic)
Bardcen J M, Steinhardt P J and Turner M S 1983 Phyr. L c f t . 126B 178
Guth A H and Pi S -Y 1982 Phys. Rev. L c i t . 49 1110
Hawking S W 1982 Phys. Lett. 115B 295
Starobinsky A A 1982 Phys. Lett. 117B 175
Rees M J 1987 Thvce fhndrrd Yewa oJ Gieuitofion ed S Hawking and U' Israel (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press)
Peebles P J E 1980 The Lnrgs Ssolr Stiucture of thc Uniueroe (Princeton: Princeton University
D-"-.,
I '"'.I

Sbapbo S L and Teukolsky S A 1983 Black Holes, White D w q f s and Neutron Star*: The
Physics of Compact Objects (New York: Wile?)

Did the universe evolve?

191

[17] Salpeter E E 1955 Astmphys. J. 121 161
[IS] Lads C J and Shu F H Science to appear
[19] Scalo 1986 Fund. Cosmic Phya. 11 1-278
[20] Larson R B 1985 Mon. Not. R. Astma. Soc.
[21] Silk J and Turner M S 1987 Phys. Rev. D 35 419
[22] Rees M 1972 Phys. Rea. Lett. 28 1669
Laper D and Hively R M 1973 Asfrophys. J . 179 361
Rees M J 1978 Naiarc 275 35
Carr B J 1977 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 181 293; 1981 Mon. N o t . R. Adron. Soc. 195 669
Carr B J, Bond J Rand Amett W I) 1984 Astrophys. 3. 277 445
[23] Teresawa N and Sato K 1985 Astrophys. J . 294 9
[24] Reeves H.Audouze J, Fowler W A and Schramm D N 1973 Artrophya. 3. 179 909
Boesgaard A M and Steigman G 1985 A n n . REV.Astron. Aatro. 23 319
[25] Greenstein G 1988 The Symbiotic C h i v e w e (New York: Morrow)
[26] Lovelock J 1988 Caior A New Look at Life on Earth, The Ages of Gaia (New York: Norton)
1271 Morowitz H 1987 Cosmic Joy and Local Pain (New York: Scribner)

[E]NE&::

Y 1985 P ? C $ Thecr. Phg ... Sop;!. 85 104

[29] Sparling talk at the 1984 Oxford meeting on quantum gravity and the foundations of quantum
mechanics (unpublished)

