                                                                                                                                                 BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                 1



                                               SDSS-III Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey Data Release 12:
                                               galaxy target selection and large scale structure catalogues

                                               Beth Reid1,2 , Shirley Ho3 , Nikhil Padmanabhan4 , Will J. Percival?5 , Jeremy Tinker6 , Rita
                                               Tojeiro7 , Martin White8,2 , Daniel J. Eisenstein9 , Claudia Maraston5 , Ashley J. Ross10 ,
                                               Ariel G. Sánchez11 , David Schlegel1,2 , Erin Sheldon12 , Michael A. Strauss13 Daniel
                                               Thomas5 , David Wake14,15 , Florian Beutler2 , Dmitry Bizyaev16,17 , Adam S. Bolton18 ,
                                               Joel R. Brownstein18 , Chia-Hsun Chuang19 , Kyle Dawson18 , Paul Harding20 , Francisco-




arXiv:1509.06529v2 [astro-ph.CO] 19 Oct 2015
                                               Shu Kitaura21 , Alexie Leauthaud22 , Karen Masters 5 , Cameron K. McBride9 , Surhud
                                               More22 , Matthew D. Olmstead23,18 , Daniel Oravetz16 , Sebastián E. Nuza24 Kaike Pan16 ,
                                               John Parejko4 , Janine Pforr5,25 , Francisco Prada19,26,27 , Sergio Rodrı́guez-Torres19,26,28 ,
                                               Salvador Salazar-Albornoz11,29 , Lado Samushia30,31,5 Donald P. Schneider32,33 , Claudia
                                               G. Scóccola34,35,36 , Audrey Simmons16 , Mariana Vargas-Magana37
                                               1 Berkeley Center for Cosmological Physics, Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA
                                               2 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                                               3 Bruce and Astrid McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
                                               4 Yale Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA
                                               5 Institute of Cosmology & Gravitation, Dennis Sciama Building, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, PO1 3FX, UK
                                               6 Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, Department of Physics, New York University, 4 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003, USA
                                               7 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9SS, UK
                                               8 Departments of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                                               9 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
                                               10 Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
                                               11 Max-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik, Postfach 1312, Giessenbachstr., 85741 Garching, Germany
                                               12 Brookhaven National Laboratory, Bldg 510, Upton, New York, NY 11973, USA
                                               13 Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA
                                               14 Department of Astronomy, University of Winsconsin-Madison, 475 N. Charter Street, Madison, WI 53706-1582, USA
                                               15 Department of Physical Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
                                               16 Apache Point Observatory and New Mexico State University, P.O. Box 59, Sunspot, NM, 88349-0059, USA
                                               17 Sternberg Astronomical Institute, Moscow State University, Moscow
                                               18 Department Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, 115 S 1400 E, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
                                               19 Instituto de Fı́sica Teórica, (UAM/CSIC), Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain
                                               20 Department of Astronomy, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
                                               21 Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
                                               22 Kavli IPMU (WPI), UTIAS, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8583, Japan
                                               23 King’s College, Department of Chemistry and Physics, Wilkes Barre, PA 18711, USA
                                               24 Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany
                                               25 Aix Marseille Universit, CNRS, LAM (Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille) UMR 7326, 13388, Marseille, France
                                               26 Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC, Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain
                                               27 Instituto de Astrofisica de Andaluca (CSIC), Glorieta de la Astronoma, E-18080 Granada, Spain
                                               28 Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid, Spain
                                               29 Universitäts-Sternwarte München, Scheinerstrasse 1, 81679 Munich, Germany
                                               30 Kansas State University, Manhattan KS 66506, USA
                                               31 National Abastumani Astrophysical Observatory, Ilia State University, 2A Kazbegi Ave., GE-1060 Tbilisi, Georgia
                                               32 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA
                                               33 Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA
                                               34 Instituto de Astrofı́sica de Canarias (IAC), C/Vı́a Láctea, s/n, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
                                               35 Facultad de Ciencias Astronómicas y Geofı́sicas -Universidad Nacional de La Plata. Paseo del Bosque S/N (1900). La Plata, Argentina
                                               36 CONICET, Rivadavia 1917, 1033, Buenos Aires, Argentina
                                               37 Instituto de Fisica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apdo. Postal 20-364, México




                                               20 October 2015




                                               c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 2–21 (0000)    Printed 20 October 2015    (MN LATEX style file v2.2)


                                       ABSTRACT
                                       The Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS), part of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
                                       (SDSS) III project, has provided the largest survey of galaxy redshifts available to date, in
                                       terms of both the number of galaxy redshifts measured by a single survey, and the effective
                                       cosmological volume covered. Key to analysing the clustering of these data to provide cosmo-
                                       logical measurements is understanding the detailed properties of this sample. Potential issues
                                       include variations in the target catalogue caused by changes either in the targeting algorithm
                                       or properties of the data used, the pattern of spectroscopic observations, the spatial distribu-
                                       tion of targets for which redshifts were not obtained, and variations in the target sky density
                                       due to observational systematics. We document here the target selection algorithms used to
                                       create the galaxy samples that comprise BOSS. We also present the algorithms used to create
                                       large scale structure catalogues for the final Data Release (DR12) samples and the associated
                                       random catalogues that quantify the survey mask. The algorithms are an evolution of those
                                       used by the BOSS team to construct catalogues from earlier data, and have been designed
                                       to accurately quantify the galaxy sample. The code used, designated MKSAMPLE, is released
                                       with this paper.
                                       Key words: cosmology: observations - (cosmology:) large-scale structure of Universe



1    INTRODUCTION                                                          proximating each survey as a single volume, limited in redshift and
                                                                           area, and sampled by a constant density of galaxies, with numbers
The size of galaxy redshift surveys has grown exponentially over
                                                                           approximately matching those of the actual surveys. Thus the re-
the last decade and will continue do so into the next, thanks to
                                                                           sults themselves are not precise and are designed to simply demon-
the continuing development of instrumentation to undertake mulit-
                                                                           strate the evolution rather than provide a quantitative comparison
object spectroscopy (MOS) on dedicated telescopes. The scientific
                                                                           between experiments. The best fit line shows the growth in the im-
driver for this dramatic increase is that galaxy redshift surveys pro-
                                                                           pact of past surveys, following the development of Multi-Object
vide a wealth of cosmological and extra-galactic information. The
                                                                           Spectrographs (MOS) on the Anglo-Australian telescope (Lewis et
most easily accessible cosmological information is encoded in 2-
                                                                           al. 1998) and the Sloan telescope (Gunn et al. 2006), which con-
point clustering statistics of the over-density field, which contain
                                                                           tinues to the next generation with a new MOS being developed
both the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation (BAO) and Redshift Space
                                                                           for the Hobby-Eberly telescope (HETDEX; Hill et al. 2008), the
Distortion (RSD) signals. The BAO scale is a comoving large-
                                                                           Mayall telescope (DESI; Levi et al. 2013), the VISTA telescope
scale enhancement in pairs of galaxies separated by ∼150 Mpc,
                                                                           (4MOST; de Jong et al. 2014), the William Herschel Telescope
which can be used to track cosmological expansion. It arises from
                                                                           (WEAVE; Dalton et al. 2014), the Subaru telescope (PFS; Takada et
the propagation of sound waves in the early Universe (Peebles &
                                                                           al. 2014) and the satellite experiments Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011)
Yu 1970; Sunyaev & Zel’dovich 1970; Doroshkevich et al. 1978),
                                                                           and WFIRST (Spergel et al. 2015) . For clarity we only plot ap-
and is quite insensitive to astrophysical processing that occurs on
                                                                           proximate DESI and Euclid predictions in Fig. 1 to show the gen-
smaller scales; thus BAO experiments are affected by a low level
                                                                           eral expected trend from these new instruments, as our simplified
of systematics (see review by Weinberg et al. 2013 for a compar-
                                                                           approach is insufficient to provide a careful differential analysis of
ison of different methods). Redshift-Space Distortions arise from
                                                                           these future projects. Also, there is significant uncertainty in the
the peculiar velocities of galaxies within a comoving frame, which
                                                                           predictions for Euclid, as a consequence of our lack of knowledge
produce coherent distortions in the measured redshifts compared to
                                                                           about the galaxy population targeted: the prediction here uses the
those produced by the Hubble expansion (Kaiser 1987). As these
                                                                           predicted volume and galaxy density of Laureijs et al. (2011). The
velocities are gravitational in origin, the amplitude depends on the
                                                                           higher redshift surveys of eBOSS and WiggleZ are inherently more
rate of structure growth, and hence RSD allow tests of General Rel-
                                                                           difficult and consequently they lie above the line: they push into
ativity (GR) on large scales.
                                                                           new redshift ranges, rather than to larger volumes.
      The BAO signature has now been detected in many different
galaxy surveys and analysed using a variety of methods. To show                 In this paper, we present the target selection and catalogue
the exponential growth in BAO measurements, Fig. 1 presents the            generation of the Data Release 12 (DR12; Alam et al. 2015) sam-
predicted error on the BAO scale expected for different surveys,           ples of galaxies selected from the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic
calculated as if the clustering signal from different directions was       Survey (BOSS; Dawson et al. 2012), which is part of SDSS-III
optimally combined to provide the best possible single BAO posi-           (Eisenstein et al. 2011). The spectroscopic sample has two primary
                                                                                                      <                                 <   <
tion measurement. We include results from various stages of the 2-         catalogues: LOWZ at z ∼      0.4, and CMASS covering 0.4 ∼     z ∼
degree-Field Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS; Colless et al. 2001,          0.7 (see Section 3 for details). An overview of the BOSS observa-
2003), Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS; York et al. 2000) and Wig-          tions is provided in Section 2; see Dawson et al. (2012) for a full
gleZ (Drinkwater et al 2010), and predictions for the continuation         description of the survey.
of the SDSS project with eBOSS (Dawson et al. 2015). For consis-                The work presented here follows on from the analysis of pre-
tency, all calculations used the code of Seo & Eisenstein (2007), ap-      vious data releases: DR12 is the third public SDSS data release
                                                                           containing BOSS spectroscopic results. The first was DR9 (Ahn et
                                                                           al. 2012), when the survey was approximately one third complete.
?   E-mail: will.percival@port.ac.uk                                       The creation of the large-scale structure catalogues from these data

                                                                                                                                    c 0000 RAS
                                                                                          BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                      3
                                                                              using an algorithm that builds on the work described above. This
                                                                              paper on the targeting algorithm and catalogue creation method
                                                                              is complemented by a series of papers measuring and analysing
                                                                              clustering, splitting the BOSS galaxies into sub-samples delineated
                                                                              by the primary targeting algorithms LOWZ and CMASS samples
                                                                              (see Section 3 for details). BAO measurements are presented in
                                                                              configuration-space (Cuesta et al. 2015) and Fourier-space (Gil-
                                                                              Marin et al. 2015a), and RSD measurements made in Fourier-space
                                                                              are presented in Gil-Marin et al. (2015b). Two further support pa-
                                                                              pers are provided in this set: Ross et al. (2015) considers the BOSS
                                                                              selection function in more detail, presenting the observational foot-
                                                                              print, masks for image quality and Galactic extinction, and weights
                                                                              to account for density relationships intrinsic to the imaging and
                                                                              spectroscopic portions of the survey. Vargas-Magana et al. (2015)
                                                                              presents systematic tests on the reconstruction algorithm used for
                                                                              anisotropic BAO analyses. A subsequent set of analyses to be re-
Figure 1. BAO measurement errors predicted for various surveys as a func-     leased soon, will consider jointly analysing the full BOSS sample,
tion of the year of publication. In order to calculate these with a consis-   without splitting by target selection.
tent methodology we plot “predictions” using the code of Seo & Eisenstein           Because the key cosmological measurements depend on the
(2007) based on a single number of galaxies, and volume for each survey.      density field, galaxy properties (except how they trace this field,
The surveys plotted are 2dFGRS early (Percival et al. 2001) and final (Cole   commonly quantified by a linear deterministic bias b), are unimpor-
et al. 2005); SDSS-II LRGs (Eisenstein et al. 2005); WiggleZ (Blake et al.    tant once redshifts have been measured, and cosmological surveys
2011); BOSS DR9 CMASS (Anderson et al. 2012); BOSS DR11 LOWZ
                                                                              are free to choose which galaxies to observe to optimise survey ef-
(Tojeiro et al. 2014) and CMASS (Anderson et al. 2014b). In terms of sur-
vey volume, BOSS DR12 is very close to DR11 and we do not show it here.
                                                                              ficiency and the optimal bias b. BOSS targets luminous galaxies
We also present approximate predictions for the eBOSS, DESI and Euclid        for spectroscopic observations as they have a large bias, are rel-
future surveys (see text for details).                                        atively easy to target, and have strong spectral features that ease
                                                                              redshift determination. The target selection adopted by BOSS is an
                                                                              extension of the targeting algorithms for the SDSS-II (Eisenstein et
was outlined in Anderson et al. (2012), alongside the isotropic BAO           al. 2001) and 2SLAQ (Cannon et al. 2006) Luminous Red Galax-
results, with the anisotropic results following in Anderson et al.            ies (LRGs), targeting fainter and bluer galaxies in order to achieve
(2014a). The development of a method to remove potential system-              the desired number density of ∼ 3 × 10−4 h3 Mpc−3 . The major-
atic errors in the clustering measurements caused by fluctuations in          ity of the galaxies are old stellar systems whose prominent 4000 Å
the target catalogue was presented in Ross et al. (2012). The DR9             break makes them relatively easy to target using multi-colour data.
catalogues were used extensively for science, which also tested the           The data from which the samples are targeted is described in Sec-
catalogues themselves. The clustering was compared with simula-               tion 2, and the LOWZ and CMASS target selection algorithms are
tions in Nuza et al. (2013), and with full model fits in Sanchez et           discussed in detail in Section 3.
al. (2012). RSD were measured by Reid et al. (2012) and enhanced                    In order to do large-scale structure analyses with the sample
by knowledge of passive galaxy evolution in Tojeiro et al. (2012):            of spectroscopically observed galaxies, we have put together cat-
the resulting GR tests were presented in Samushia et al. (2013).              alogues including information on the detailed angular and radial
Primordial non-Gaussianity was constrained by Ross et al. (2013),             mask of the sample including the redshift completeness, the ob-
while Zhao et al. (2013) reported neutrino masses, and Scoccola               serving conditions when the imaging and spectroscopic observa-
et al. (2013) examined the time variation of physical constants.              tions were made, and the appropriate weights to give each object, as
This work led to further refinements of the catalogue creation al-            well as random (i.e., unclustered) catalogues with the same selec-
gorithm for the analysis of the second public BOSS data release               tion function. These collectively make up the large-scale structure
DR10 (Ahn et al. 2014), which coincided with an internal release              catalogues, whose contents are detailed in this paper.
(called DR11). In particular, the code was rewritten into a modu-                   Key to creating these catalogues for the BOSS galaxy surveys
lar version, called MKSAMPLE, new weights were used to correct                is the ability to predict where we could have observed galaxies, as
for fluctuations in the expected target density, and new masks were           well as where galaxies exist, thus defining the survey or sample
used for “bad” areas. These refinements were presented alongside              mask. This mask is intricately linked with the selection of galax-
the BAO results for the CMASS sample in Anderson et al. (2014b)               ies: in general, corrections for selection effects can be applied to
and the LOWZ sample in Tojeiro et al. (2014), and were confirmed              either the mask or the galaxy sample to produce a match between
to be robust to colour (Ross et al. 2014) and against possible sys-           the two. In order to understand the mask, we need to understand
tematics in the fit (Vargas-Magana et al. 2014). As for DR9, the              both the target sample and the subsequent spectroscopy and red-
results were extensively used, further testing the catalogues: RSD            shift measurement, which we briefly summarise in Section 4. The
measurements have been made in a number of different ways (Beut-              BOSS galaxy mask is quantified using a random catalog, a Poisson
ler et al. 2014a; Samushia et al. 2014; Sanchez et al. 2014; Chuang           sampling of the volume covered by the selected galaxies, includ-
et al. 2013), the bispectrum calculated and analysed (Gil-Marin et            ing any variations in density other than the cosmological clustering
al. 2014a,b), and neutrino mass constraints presented (Beutler et             signal we wish to measure. The 3D mask does not have to be quan-
al. 2014b). Saito et al. (2015) account for redshift dependent selec-         tified by a Poisson sampling, but this is a straightforward approach
tion effects and compare clustering and RSD with predictions from             to this - in effect providing a Monte-Carlo sampling of the volume
abundance matching.                                                           covered. This weighted random sample and the weighted galaxy
      We have now analysed the final BOSS DR12 galaxy sample                  sample form the starting point for the key BOSS galaxy cluster-

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
4      Reid et al.
ing analyses. Section 5 presents the method adopted by the BOSS          Redshifts are then measured using the methods described in Bolton
team to prepare catalogues of galaxies and randoms, using routines       et al. (2012). The spectroscopic observations were split into distinct
made publicly available in a code called MKSAMPLE. This is a fur-        areas of sky, which we call chunks, targeted separately and sequen-
ther extension of the code used for the early DR9 analyses, which        tially in time, each defined by a subset of the total footprint. Later
is described in Anderson et al. (2012).                                  chunks can overlap earlier chunks and recover unobserved targets.
      Although the targeting algorithm adopted for BOSS is               The angular distribution of chunks 2-11, which are special as they
isotropic and the catalogue of target objects covers an angular area     reflect early versions of the target selection (see Appendix A), but
larger than that of spectroscopic observations, the mask is compli-      also serve to show how the survey is built up from chunks are shown
cated by various anisotropic effects including variations in imaging     in Fig. A1, and basic definitions for geometrical descriptors used in
depth due to recalibration of the SDSS photometric scale and rere-       this paper are provided in Table 1.
duction of the imaging as the spectrosocpic survey progressed, vari-           The start of spectroscopic observations preceded the finalisa-
ation of seeing, variation with stellar density caused by occultation    tion of the DR8 imaging reductions, so the imaging data used by
by stars, the inability to measure spectra for close to another target   BOSS are based on the photometric measurements available at the
observed at the same time, and the failure to measure spectra as a       time of tiling (see Section 4.2), which may differ from the quan-
function of signal-to-noise ratio in the spectrum. These effects are     tities available for an object in the DR8 catalog. BOSS targeting
often corrected by applying a weight to the galaxies (e.g. Ross et al.   was performed using three different versions of the reduction soft-
2012), but could instead be incorporated into the mask. The quality      ware that resolves the catalogues from overlapping imaging data
of the DR12 data is such that we can now observe systematic ef-          (RESOLVE; see Aihara et al. 2011). Chunks 1–4 used a version of
fects that couple radial and angular fluctuations, and we introduce      the RESOLVE software tagged on 14-06-2009, chunks 5–11 used
3D corrections for these. The manner adopted to deal with these          a version tagged on 16-11-2009, and chunks 12 onwards used the
effects for BOSS is described in Section 6.                              same version as that used to produce DR8. In total, 17% of targets
      BOSS includes a number of galaxy catalogues with different         were targeted with pre-DR8 RESOLVE versions. Because these
selection functions, some of which spatially overlap. The combina-       different versions of the software selected different imaging data to
tion of these to optimally quantify the underlying matter overden-       be designated as “primary” (i.e. either the only or the best obser-
sity field is non-trivial, and we present the method adopted by the      vation of this object; see the DR8 documentation for more details),
BOSS team in Section 7.                                                  approximately 9% of the imaging data used for targeting CMASS
      The MKSAMPLE code will be released upon publication                galaxies is now designated as secondary1 in the DR8 database.
of this paper, and we will also publish the resulting Large-
Scale Structure catalogues, with a full datamodel describing
each. These will all be linked from the main SDSS web site               2.2   Parent catalog
http://www.sdss.org/surveys/boss .                                       The selection of galaxy targets for spectroscopic observation is
                                                                         based on a parent catalogue of photometrically identified objects
                                                                         within the imaging data. The parent catalogue was based on ob-
2     DATA                                                               jects chosen from 3172 deg2 in the Southern Galactic Cap (SGC)
2.1    Imaging Data                                                      and 7606 deg2 in the Northern Galactic Cap (NGC), as described in
                                                                         this section. The SDSS imaging pipeline returns a number of dif-
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-I/II; York et al. 2000) im-           ferent measurements of the photometry of galaxies. Full descrip-
aged approximately 7,606 deg2 of the Northern Galactic Hemi-             tions may be found on the SDSS website2 and in Stoughton et al.
sphere and 600 deg2 of the Southern Galactic Hemisphere in the           (2002). For galaxy target selection we use three photometric mea-
ugriz bands (Fukugita et al. 1996; Smith et al. 2002; Doi et al.         surements, which have all been corrected for Galactic extinction
2010), using a specially designed camera (Gunn et al. 1998) on the       using the Schlegel, Finkbeiner & Davis (1998) dust maps.
2.5m Sloan telescope (Gunn et al. 2006) at the Apache Point Ob-                The colours of galaxies are based on SDSS model magnitudes
servatory in New Mexico. The SDSS-III project (Eisenstein et al.         (denoted by the subscript mod). These are determined by using the
2011) obtained additional imaging to make the region of the South-       best-fit (psf-convolved) deVaucouleurs or exponential profile fit in
ern Galactic Hemisphere contiguous, covering 3,172 deg2 . As part        the r band to determine the fluxes in the other bands (full details
of this effort, the original SDSS-I/II data and the SDSS-III data        are provided in Abazajian et al. 2004). Cuts in apparent magni-
were reduced with the latest versions of the SDSS image process-         tude are made with “cmodel” magnitudes (denoted by a subscript
ing and calibration pipelines (Lupton et al. 2001; Pier et al. 2003;     cmod). These are a linear combination of the flux from the best fit
Padmanabhan et al. 2008). These data were released as part of Data       exponential and deVaucouleurs profile fit in each band separately3
Release 8 (Aihara et al. 2011), and form the parent imaging cata-
logue for the BOSS galaxy target selection. There are a number                             fcmod = (1 − P )fexp + P fdeV ,                       (1)
of differences between the processing performed for DR8 (see the         where P is the best-fit coefficient obtained from a fit of the linear
DR8 paper Aihara et al. 2011 for a detailed discussion) and ear-         combination of the deVaucouleurs and exponential profile fits to the
lier reductions; reproducing BOSS galaxy samples derived from            image, and weights the different contributions (reported as fracdeV
the imaging data requires using the appropriate algorithms.              by the SDSS pipelines), and f represents the flux (not magnitude)
      BOSS obtained spectra and redshifts for 1,372,737 galaxies         assuming an exponential or deVaucouleur profile. Star-galaxy sep-
over 9,376 deg2 . The targets are assigned to tiles of diameter 3 deg,   aration compares the PSF magnitudes of galaxies (denoted by a
using a tiling algorithm that is adaptive to the density of targets
on the sky (Blanton et al. 2003). Spectra are then obtained using
the BOSS spectrographs (Smee et al. 2013). Each observation is           1 i.e., there is an overlapping observation with higher quality photometry
performed in a series of 900 sec exposures, integrating until a min-     2 http://www.sdss3.org/dr8
imum signal-to-noise ratio is achieved for the faint galaxy targets.     3 contrasted with model magnitudes where the fit in the r band is used



                                                                                                                  c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                                   BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                                 5
    spherical polygon    The base unit of a M ANGLE mask. Spherical polygons are used to represent the boundaries of the imaging survey from which the
                         targets are drawn, the circular fields defined by spectroscopic tiles, as well as regions to be removed from the survey footprint (e.g.
                         the centerpost of each spectroscopic tile; see Sec. 5.1.1 for a full list).
    spectroscopic tile   Output of the tiling algorithm providing a central location on the sky and list of targets to be observed for spectroscopic observations.
                         Each tile has a circular field-of-view of radius 1.49 degrees, and can be observed by multiple plates.
    plate                Physical plate with a hole drilled for each target, based on the anticipated airmass of observation. Spectroscopic tiles may be
                         observed using multiple plates.
    chunk                Basic unit of sky input to the tiling algorithm. It consists of a set of rectangles in a spherical coordinate system. The SDSS-III BOSS
                         survey is composed of 38 chunks.
    sector               The union of spherical polygons defined by a unique intersection of spectroscopic tiles. The survey completeness is treated as
                         uniform within a sector.

Table 1. Basic definitions for the geometric description of SDSS-III BOSS observations and the LSS M ANGLE masks.


subscript PSF) with model or cmodel magnitudes; PSF magnitudes                       3.1    Requirements and Criteria
underestimate the flux from extended sources compared with the
                                                                                     The BOSS sample was designed to measure the BAO signature in
model fits (see § 3.3.2 for details). Finally, we use “fiber2” (de-
                                                                                     the two-point galaxy clustering signal, and in particular to meet er-
noted by subscript fib2) magnitudes to estimate the expected flux
                                                                                     ror requirements on the measurement of the angular diameter dis-
through the SDSS-III 2” fibres.
                                                                                     tance dA and Hubble parameter H at z = 0.35 and z = 0.6. These
      The parent sample for the BOSS galaxy target selection is
                                                                                     requirements can be met by a survey covering an area of approx-
constructed by selecting all detected objects that the photometric
                                                                                     imately 10,000 deg2 with a comoving number density of galaxies
pipeline classifies as galaxies, and that are chosen by RESOLVE
                                                                                     of 3 × 10−4 h3 Mpc−3 for 0.1 < z < 0.6. This density is close to
to be “primary”. The targeting software uses the photometry of the
                                                                                     optimal for large-scale cosmological studies (e.g., Kaiser 1986). To
primary objects to select targets for spectroscopic follow-up. The
                                                                                     efficiently undertake such a survey using the Sloan telescope and
variation in selected targets from different imaging data is consis-
                                                                                     spectrographs, we need to select a sub-sample of the parent cata-
tent with that expected given the photometric uncertainties, and so
                                                                                     logue of photometrically identified objects that fulfil the following
we treat the regions targeted with pre- and final DR8 imaging as
                                                                                     criteria simultaneously:
statistically identical. We do not make any cuts on photometric-
ity at this stage; unphotometric data is discarded at the catalogue
                                                                                        (i) galaxies that lie in the desired redshift range 0.1 < z < 0.6,
creation stage (see § 5.1.1). Users constructing their own samples
                                                                                        (ii) sufficient galaxies to meet the desired density over the full
for science analyses are advised to use the CALIB STATUS flag to
                                                                                     redshift range,
cut on photometricity (restricting to photometric observations cor-
                                                                                        (iii) well-defined limits in stellar populations, to isolate a
responds to CALIB STATUS==1). We cull objects with suspect
                                                                                     strongly clustered subsample of galaxies,
photometry as reported in the flags set by the imaging pipeline. In
particular, we require objects that are detected in the r and i bands.                  (iv) redshifts that can be measured in a relatively short exposure
In the Image Processing pipeline, this is indicated by having one                    with our telescope,
of the BINNED1, BINNED2 or BINNED4 flags set in both the r                              (v) few contaminating objects that are not part of the desired
and i bands. We also require that the OBJC FLAG flag, which is a                     sample,
combination of the per-filter flags appropriate for the whole object                    (vi) selectable uniformly across the desired area,
(the full definition is provided in Stoughton et al. 2002) has                          (vii) selection is not sensitive to systematic errors in the data
                                                                                     used.
  (i) Objects not to be saturated :(NOT SATUR) OR (SATUR
AND (NOT SATUR CENTER)),                                                             The challenge of target selection is to provide an algorithm for
  (ii) Blended     objects    :    (NOT BLENDED) OR (NOT                             selecting the subsample of the parent imaging catalogue that op-
NODEBLEND),                                                                          timally meets these goals. Selection based solely on an appar-
  (iii) Other photometric quality flags : (NOT BRIGHT) AND                           ent magnitude cut, as used for the SDSS-I and -II Main Galaxy
(NOT TOO MANY PEAKS) AND (NOT PEAKCENTER) AND                                        Sample (Strauss et al. 2002) in general selects too many low red-
(NOT NOTCHECKED) AND (NOT NOPROFILE).                                                shift and low luminosity galaxies. Rather, in BOSS we follow
                                                                                     a similar philosophy to the selection of Luminous Red Galaxies
                                                                                     (LRGs) in SDSS-I and -II (Eisenstein et al. 2001) and the 2SLAQ
                                                                                     survey (Cannon et al. 2006) using colour-magnitude and colour-
3     TARGET SELECTION
                                                                                     colour cuts, selecting luminous galaxies with strong spectral fea-
We now turn to the specifics of the target selection algorithms used                 tures (item (iv) above).
to define the BOSS spectroscopic galaxy samples. We first summa-                           At redshifts z < 0.4, we can select such a sample by extend-
rize the criteria that we wish our algorithm to satisfy (§ 3.1), with                ing to fainter LRGs than observed in SDSS-I and -II. At higher
the aim of defining a uniformly selected sample over a broad red-                    redshifts, we do not restrict ourselves to red galaxies, and instead
shift range. The galaxy sample is targeted using two different algo-                 select an approximately stellar mass-limited sample of objects of all
rithms, which we term “LOWZ” (detailed in § 3.2) and “CMASS”                         intrinsic colours. As in Eisenstein et al. (2001), two sets of colours
(for “Constant (stellar) Mass”, § 3.3), respectively. Star-galaxy sep-               are necessary to describe the colour locus: one when the 4000 Å
aration is treated differently in the CMASS sample than elsewhere                    break lies in the SDSS g-band, and the other when it redshifts into
in SDSS, as we describe in § 3.3.2. A variant of the CMASS al-                       the r-band at z ∼ 0.4. Selecting these two subsamples requires
gorithm was used to explore the colour boundaries of the sample                      defining fiducial colours that track the locus of a passively evolving
(§ 3.4).                                                                             population of galaxies in gri colour space. Following Eisenstein et

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
6      Reid et al.

                                                                                      1.0


                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                =0
                                                                                                                                                       c perp
                                                                                r-i   0.6

                                                                                                                                                c pa
                                                                                                                                   c pa
                                                                                                                                                   r,
                                                                                      0.4                                            r,                fain
                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                    c pa
                                                                                                      r,
                                                                                                                                          ed
                                                                                                                                              ia
                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                           br
                                                                                                             ht
                                                                                      0.2                  ig

                                                                                        0.5                1.0           1.5              2.0                    2.5
                                                                                                                         g-r

                                                                               Figure 3. Density plot of LOWZ galaxies in the (g − r, r − i) colour plane;
                                                                               red corresponds to higher density and dark blue to lower density, in an ar-
                                                                               bitrary normalisation and linear scale. Redshift increases rightwards and
                                                                               upwards along the galaxies locus, starting at z ≃ 0.1 on the bottom left
                                                                               corner. The knee on the galaxy locus is caused by the 4000 Å break tran-
                                                                               sitioning between the g− and r-band filters, and happens at z ≈ 0.4. The
                                                                               colours c⊥ and c|| are simple rotations of this colour plane, and trace the
Figure 2. Top panel: Black dots show median c|| for LOWZ spectroscopi-         position of a target in parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the data
cally confirmed galaxies as a function of measured redshift, with the dashed   locus. The black thick line represents the passively evolving LRG model of
lines showing the interquartile range. The efficiency of using this quantity   Maraston et al. (2009). The green and red dashed lines are the colour and
to track redshift is clear. Bottom panel: Median rmod − imod as a function     magnitude targeting cuts – see the main text for details. The few targets seen
of redshift for confirmed CMASS galaxies, with interquartile range (dashed     outside of the selection cut are due to differences in the targeting and final
lines). The way in which we can track the high-redshift locus of galaxies      photometry, see Section 2.
using this colour, and select as a function of redshift, is clear.

                                                                               tion of a metal-poor coeval population. This model was found to
al. (2001) and Cannon et al. (2006), we define
                                                                               be a good fit to the g, r, i colours of luminous red galaxies (LRGs)
c||   =    0.7(gmod − rmod ) + 1.2(rmod − imod − 0.18)                  (2)    from the 2SLAQ survey (Cannon et al. 2006) as a function of red-
                                                                               shift, over models containing star formation in various amount. The
c⊥    =    (rmod − imod ) − (gmod − rmod )/4.0 − 0.18                   (3)
                                                                               same model also better fit the overall luminosity evolution of BOSS
to describe the low redshift locus and                                         galaxies (Montero-Dorta et al. 2015). The knee seen in the galaxy
                                                                               locus corresponds to the transition of the 4000 Å break from the
d⊥    =     (rmod − imod ) − (gmod − rmod )/8 ,                         (4)
                                                                               g− to the r−band. The parameter c|| quantifies the position of a
to describe the high-redshift locus. As discussed above, the colours           galaxy along the main locus, and c⊥ characterises the departure of
are defined using SDSS model magnitudes, and are corrected for                 a galaxy from the centre of the locus; c⊥ = 0 lies approximately at
Milky Way extinction. The efficiency of these selections to se-                the centre of the galaxy distribution.
lect luminous galaxies as a function of redshift is demonstrated in                  We select targets at low redshift (z < 0.4) around the pre-
Fig. 2, which shows how c|| and rmod − imod versus redshift for                dicted colour locus using
observed BOSS galaxies.
                                                                                                                  |c⊥ | < 0.2,                                       (5)
      Where the targeting algorithms use colour selection, they are
built on model magnitudes, which are based on the flux measured                (red dashed lines in Fig. 3) and we select the brightest and reddest
through equivalent apertures in all band and thus provide unbiased             objects at each redshift using a sliding colour-magnitude cut with
colours of galaxies. Brightness limits are instead based on cmodel             c⊥ (an effective proxy for a photometric redshift):
magnitudes, which provide better estimates of the total light ob-
served.                                                                                                rcmod < 13.5 + c|| /0.3.                                      (6)
                                                                               The dashed green lines in Fig. 3 show the effective cuts in c|| for
                                                                               three different r−band magnitudes: r = 16, 18.73 and 19.6 mag
3.2   The LOWZ sample
                                                                               corresponding to the faint boundary, the median magnitude and
The LOWZ sample is designed to extend the SDSS-I/II Cut I LRG                  the bright boundary of the sample respectively. Thus fainter ob-
sample (Eisenstein et al. 2001) to z ≈ 0.4 to fainter luminosities,            jects must be redder to pass the cut. This cut is the most important
in order to increase the number density of the sample by roughly a             criterion in the selection of LOWZ galaxies - it drives the number
factor of 3. Fig. 3 shows how the colours c|| and c⊥ describe the              density of the sample by effectively setting the magnitude limit as a
evolution of a passively evolving stellar population with redshift.            function of redshift, and aims to produce a constant number density
Redshift increases from the bottom left to upper right. The black              over the desired redshift range. The number of galaxies in the sam-
line shows the passively evolving LRG model of Maraston et al.                 ple is therefore highly sensitive to this cut (see Ross et al. 2012;
(2009). The Maraston et al. (2009) ’LRG’ template is a model of a              Tojeiro et al. 2014). The resulting space density of the sample is
metal-rich population in passive evolution containing a small frac-            shown in Fig. 11; the sample is close to volume-limited (constant

                                                                                                                           c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                      BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                     7
space density at ∼ 3 × 10−4 h3 Mpc−3 ) over the redshift range         where TILEID identifies spectroscopic tiles, and this cut corre-
0.2 < z < 0.4.                                                         sponds to chunk numbers larger than 6.
     We impose brightness limits on the targets, such that                  Further details on this issue, and other slight changes in the
                                                                       targeting of LOWZ galaxies in early chunks, can be found in Ap-
                         16 < rcmod < 19.6.                      (7)
                                                                       pendix A. Briefly, LOWZ targets in chunk 2, and LOWZ targets in
The faint limit ensures a high redshift success rate. The bright       chunks 3-6, were selected with different algorithms from those of
limit excludes a significant number of low-redshift blue galaxies      subsequent data. For the purposes of a large-scale structure catalog,
that would otherwise pass the colour cut, but also excludes a frac-    in previous data releases we simply removed chunks 2-6 from the
tion of brightest cluster galaxies in low-redshift massive clusters    LOWZ sample and the corresponding mask. In § 7 we construct
(Hoshino et al. 2015). A bright cut was not needed in SDSS-I/II as     separate samples using the chunk 2 (“LOWZE2”) and chunk 3-6
such galaxies were already targeted by the SDSS-I/II Main Galaxy       (“LOWZE3”) selections, and combine all three LOWZ catalogues
Sample (Strauss et al. 2002), but a significant fraction of the BOSS   with the CMASS samples to construct a single unified sample ap-
footprint lies outside that of SDSS-I and -II.                         propriate for analyses restricted to large scales, such as BAO fitting.
     The star-galaxy separation follows the same procedure intro-      The effects of these changes on the density of galaxies measured as
duced in Eisenstein et al. (2001) for the LRGs,                        a function of redshift can be seen in Fig. 11.
                         rpsf − rcmod > 0.3 .                    (8)
The cmodel magnitude is a proxy for a “total” magnitude for a          3.3     The CMASS sample
galaxy, while the PSF magnitude fits the unresolved component of       The CMASS sample uses similar selection cuts to those utilised
the object. The difference between the two is therefore a measure      by the Cut-II LRGs from SDSS-I/II and the LRGs in 2SLAQ, but
of the extendedness of the galaxy.                                     extends them both bluer and fainter in order to increase the number
      In summary, the LOWZ selection algorithm, as implemented         density of targets in the redshift range 0.4 < z < 0.7 and get closer
after commissioning, is as follows:                                    to a mass limited sample.
        rcmod        <          13.5 + c|| /0.3                  (9)        The quantity d⊥ (Fig. 4) effectively discards low-redshift
                                                                       galaxies by choosing
         |c⊥ |       <          0.2                            (10)
           16    < rcmod <      19.6                           (11)                                  d⊥ > 0.55.                          (13)
rpsf − rcmod         >          0.3 ,                          (12)    We do not apply any further colour cuts, with the exception of a
                                                                       sliding colour-magnitude cut that selects the brightest objects at
    The galaxies in the LOWZ sample may be selected from the
                                                                       each redshift, in such a way as to keep an approximately constant
DR12 database using the following flags, whose definitions can be
                                                                       stellar mass limit over the redshift range of CMASS according to
found on the SDSS website4 :
                                                                       the passively evolving model of Maraston et al. (2009):
   • BOSS TARGET1 && 20              Objects targeted by the LOWZ
                                                                                    icmod < min(19.86 + 1.6(d⊥ − 0.8), 19.9) .           (14)
algorithm.
   • SPECPRIMARY == 1              Objects with spectra, removing          This approach is a significant departure from SDSS-I/II Cut-II
duplicate observations.                                                and 2SLAQ LRGs - which consisted of essentially a flux-limited
   • ZWARNING NOQSO == 0                  Objects whose spectro-       sample with a colour cut to isolate the reddest galaxies.
scopic redshifts are cleanly measured.                                     We impose model and magnitude limits as follows:
   • CLASS NOQSO == ’GALAXY’                 Objects whose spectra
are those of a galaxy (as opposed to a quasar or star).                17.5     <     icmod < 19.9 ,                                     (15)
                                                                       ifib2    <     21.5 .                                             (16)
      The basic properties of the LOWZ sample are presented in
Parejko et al. (2013), who fitted the small-scale clustering of the                                                                      (17)
galaxies using halo occupation distribution (HOD) modelling. They      The faint magnitude limits are set to ensure a high redshift success
demonstrated that these galaxies lie in massive haloes, with a mean    rate, whereas the bright limit protects against some low-redshift
halo mass of 5.2 × 1013 h−1 M , a large-scale bias of ∼ 2.0 and a      interlopers. In the first 14 tiling chunks, CMASS objects were tar-
satellite fraction of 12±2%. These galaxies occupy haloes with av-     geted with ifib2 < 21.7, but the redshift failure rate at the faint end
erage masses between those of the CMASS sample and the original        of this range was quite poor, so we revised this limit to the final
SDSS I/II LRG sample.                                                  value of ifib2 < 21.5.
                                                                             To exclude outliers with problematic deblending, we further
3.2.1   Exceptions to the LOWZ targeting                               impose the following cuts on colour and rdev,i (the effective radius
                                                                       in the fit to the deVaucouleurs profile for the i-band magnitude,
During the first nine months of BOSS observations, the incorrect       measured in pixels):
star-galaxy separation criterion was used to identify LOWZ targets,
removing a significant fraction of galaxies (see Appendix A). To se-   rmod − imod       <     2                                         (18)
lect a uniformly-targeted sample from all LOWZ redshifts, with the              rdev,i   <     20.0 pix .                                (19)
selection criteria described in this section, the simplest procedure
                                                                       These cuts remove a very small fraction of targets. The CMASS
is to avoid those data with the use of an additional cut
                                                                       star-galaxy separation is described in detail in the next section.
    • TILEID⩾ 10324,                                                        CMASS galaxies can be selected from the DR12 database us-
                                                                       ing the following flags:
4   http://www.sdss.org                                                  • BOSS TARGET1 && 21

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
8         Reid et al.

         1.6                                                                     significantly incomplete at stellar masses M∗ < 1011.3 M and
                                                                                 z > 0.6 for a Kroupa initial mass function, and is roughly consis-
         1.4                                                                     tent with a volume-limited sample at higher masses and lower red-
                                                                                 shift. Thomas et al. (2013) presented similar results, showing that
                                                                                 stellar velocity dispersions of BOSS galaxies peak at ∼240 kms1
         1.2                                                                     with a narrow distribution virtually independent of redshift. Most
r-i                                                                              recently, Leauthaud et al. (2015) quantified the stellar mass com-
         1.0                                                                     pleteness of CMASS and LOWZ using data from the Stripe 82 re-
                                                                                 gion of sky along the celestial equator - a narrow, but deeper subset
         0.8                                                                     of the SDSS imaging survey region, that is 2 magnitudes deeper
                                                                                 than the single epoch SDSS imaging (Annis et al. 2014). Using the
         0.6                                                                     Stripe 82 Massive Galaxy Catalog (Bundy et al. 2015), they esti-
                            0.55
                 d perp =                                                        mate that CMASS is 80% complete at log10 (M∗ /M ) ⩾ 11.6
           0.0     0.5        1.0      1.5        2.0       2.5        3.0       in the redshift range z = [0.51, 0.61]. The stellar mass complete-
                                       g-r                                       ness of CMASS decreases at lower and higher redshifts and the de-
                                                                                 nomination “constant mass” should be considered only as a loose
         1.6                                                                     approximation outside of the redshift window z = [0.51, 0.61].
                                                                                 However, the combination of LOWZ and CMASS yields a spec-
         1.4                                                                     troscopic sample that is 80% complete at log10 (M∗ /M ) ⩾ 11.6
                                                                                 at z < 0.61. Compared to cut-II LRGs, CMASS galaxies have
         1.2                                                                     a larger range of properties including morphology (Masters et al.

d_perp
                                                                                 2011), star-formation rates (Thomas et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2012)
         1.0                                                                     and star-formation histories (Tojeiro et al. 2012), partly because
                                                                                 no red cut has been imposed on the g-r observed-frame colour. It
                                                                                 should be noted however that, for example, galaxies with detectable
         0.8                                                                     emission-lines (hence hosting very young stellar populations) still
                                                                                 represent only 4% of the sample (see Thomas et al. 2013).
         0.6

          17.0    17.5        18.0     18.5      19.0       19.5       20.0      3.3.1   Exceptions in CMASS targeting flag
                                     i_cmag
                                                                                 The meaning of BOSS TARGET1 && 21 (the CMASS targeting
Figure 4. Both panels show density plots of CMASS galaxies; red cor-             flag) evolved during the first 14 chunks of the survey. Therefore
responds to higher density and dark blue to lower density in an arbitrary        BOSS TARGET1 && 21 will not select CMASS galaxies (as de-
normalisation and linear scale. The black thick line shows the passively         fined by the equations in the previous sections) in these regions, and
evolving LRG model of Maraston et al. (2009). Top: redshift increases up-
                                                                                 further subsampling is required based on galaxy colours and mag-
wards, starting at z ≃ 0.4 at d⊥ = 0.55. Bottom: the sliding cut in d⊥
                                                                                 nitudes to recover the final selection in these regions. Alternatively,
with i−band magnitude, designed to select an approximately stellar-mass
complete sample. Stellar mass increases with the perpendicular distance to       these chunks can be explicitly excluded. For the first 14 chunks the
the sliding cut, represented here by the red dashed line - see Maraston et al.   following exceptions should be noted:
(2013) for details. The green dashed line shows the sliding cut adopted for
                                                                                   • Chunks 1 & 2: The data taken in the commissioning phase
the CMASS SPARSE sample (see Section 3.4). Vertical solid lines show
the magnitude limits. On both panels, the small fraction of targets that lie
                                                                                 (chunks 1 & 2) used a significantly broader selection criteria (see
outside of the selection cut are due to differences in the targeting and final   Section 3.3.3), and therefore must be dealt with carefully.
photometry, see Section 2. Only chunks greater than 6 are shown.                   • Chunks 3-6: The data taken in chunks 3-6 used a slightly
                                                                                 looser icmod cut, selecting instead on icmod < 19.92 + 1.6(d⊥ −
                                                                                 0.8).
    • SPECPRIMARY == 1                                                             • Chunks 1-14: As mentioned above, the cut in ifib2 changed
    • ZWARNING NOQSO == 0                                                        during the survey. In chunks 1-14 the targeting required ifib2 <
    • CLASS NOQSO == ’GALAXY’                                                    21.7.

      The basic clustering properties of the CMASS sample are pre-               With the exception of chunk 1, all of these chunks are included in
sented in White et al. (2011), which fitted the small-scale cluster-             the LSS catalogue after applying the required subsampling based
ing of the galaxies using HOD modelling. They showed that these                  on colours and/or magnitudes.
galaxies lie in massive haloes, with a mean halo mass of 2.6 × 1013
h−1 M , a large-scale bias of ∼ 2.0 and a satellite fraction of 10%.
These galaxies occupy haloes with lower masses than those of the                 3.3.2   Star-Galaxy Separation in the CMASS sample
LOWZ sample, although the bias is similar, a consequence of them                 The difference between psf and model magnitudes is a measure
being at higher redshift.                                                        of the extendedness of a source, thus making it useful to separate
      CMASS galaxies are massive, with M∗ > 1011 M (e.g.                         stars from galaxies. For the commissioning phase of the survey we
Chen et al. 2012; Maraston et al. 2013), and the majority are                    applied a star-galaxy separation criterion identical to that used in
dominated by old stellar populations with low star-formation rates               the 2SLAQ survey (Cannon et al. 2006), a sloping cut in ipsf −imod :
(e.g. Chen et al. 2012; Thomas et al. 2013; Tojeiro et al. 2012).
Maraston et al. (2013) argues that the CMASS sample becomes                                    ipsf − imod > 0.2 + 0.2(20 − imod ) .               (20)

                                                                                                                        c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                           BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                          9




Figure 5. The distribution of spectroscopically confirmed stars (large blue   Figure 6. The dependence of the star galaxy separation on the FWHM of
points) and galaxies (small red points) in the psf-model vs model i-band      the imaging PSF. The top panel shows the fraction, and the bottom panel
(top) and z-band (bottom) planes selected in the CMASS sample of the          the number, of spectroscopically classified stars and galaxies in the com-
commissioning data. The black lines are the linear cuts that remove the       missioning data that are excluded by the additional z−band star-galaxy
most spectroscopically confirmed stars whilst removing less than 1% of the    separation as functions of r−band FWHM.
galaxies. The z−band cut was added to the original i−band cut targeting
from chunk 3 onwards.
                                                                              Fig. 6 shows how the fraction of stars and galaxies removed by the
Whilst this cut is effective at removing the bulk of the stars, roughly       new z−band criteria depends on the r−band PSF. The fraction of
6.9% of ∼7000 CMASS targets from the commissioning runs had                   galaxies removed is fairly flat at ∼ 1% for PSF FWHM < 1.5” and
stellar spectra, mainly cool M-dwarfs.                                        then rapidly increases at higher FWHMs. The fraction of stars re-
      Fig. 5 displays the distribution of the spectroscopically classi-       moved displays the opposite trend. Fig. 6 also presents the numbers
fied stars (blue) and galaxies (red) in the ipsf − imod vs imod and           of stars and galaxies as a function of r−band FWHM, demonstrat-
zpsf −zmod vs zmod planes for these commissioning targets. As ex-             ing that the vast majority of the sample is selected from imaging
pected, the stars preferentially occupy lower values of psf−model             with FWHM <1.500 . This slight seeing-dependent star-galaxy sep-
than the galaxies, and so applying a more restrictive cut would re-           aration will result in the imprint of a spatial dependence in the den-
move more stars but at the expense of removing some galaxies. For             sity of galaxies across the survey, which can be corrected using
a maximum loss of just 1% of galaxies we found the linear cuts                seeing-dependent weights (see 6.4 for details).
that would remove the largest numbers of stars. These cuts, shown                   Whilst the above analysis addresses the fraction of galax-
as the black lines in Figure 5, remove 31% and 52% of the stars               ies lost due to the addition of the z−band star galaxy separation
that remained in the commissioning data for the i− and z−band                 criteria, it provides no indication of how many compact galaxies
cuts respectively. Since the z−band cut,                                      were removed by the original i−band cut. To investigate this issue
                                                                              we combined the deep coadded SDSS Stripe82 imaging (Abaza-
                 zpsf − zmod > 9.125 − 0.46zmod ,                     (21)    jian et al. 2009; Annis et al. 2014) with near-infrared J and K−
performed significantly better, it was added to the original i−band           band imaging from the UKIDSS Large Area Survey Data Release
cut (Eq. 20) for all data from Chunk 3 onwards (i.e., after the com-          4 (Lawrence et al. 2007; Casali et al. 2007; Hewett et al. 2006;
missioning runs), such that targets have to pass both cuts to be se-          Hambly et al. 2008) in order to define a robust set of stars and
lected. Even though the z−band cut alone removes the vast major-              galaxies over an area of 150 deg2 . A J − K < 1.1 colour cut
ity of the stars excluded by the i−band cut, we kept the i−band cut           provides an excellent separation between stars and galaxies in the
in place to ensure that we could apply a consistent star-galaxy sep-          colour-magnitude region that the CMASS galaxies occupy. When
aration throughout the survey. This is achieved simply by retroac-            this information is combined with the higher S/N measurement of
tively applying the z−band cut to the commissioning data.                     zpsf − zmod from the coadded imaging we can confidently separate
      Since these star-galaxy separation criteria measure the com-            stars and galaxies. Using these data we estimate that the final star-
pactness of the objects in the SDSS imaging, their effectiveness              galaxy separation cuts removes 2.3% of the full sample of galaxies
will depend on the imaging PSF. Based on the commissioning data,              selected by the CMASS colour cuts.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
10         Reid et al.
3.3.3     Summary of CMASS target selection                               4     SPECTROSCOPIC OBSERVATIONS
In summary, the CMASS target selection for the bulk of the survey         4.1    Previously known redshifts
is as follows:
                                                                          Fractions of the LOWZ and CMASS targets have a previous ro-
          icmod           <        19.86 + 1.6(d⊥ − 0.8)           (22)   bust object classification and redshift determined from the SDSS-
           17.5       < icmod <    19.9                            (23)   II survey (York et al. 2000; Abazajian et al. 2009). We therefore
                                                                          matched our target sample to a sample of “known objects” with pre-
             d⊥           >        0.55                            (24)
                                                                          determined secure classifications and redshifts and did not spec-
 ipsf − imod              >        0.2 + 0.2(20 − imod )           (25)   troscopically reobserve these galaxies within BOSS. This subsam-
zpsf − zmod               >        9.125 − 0.46zmod                (26)   ple of targets has a complicated angular distribution on the sky:
rmod − imod               <        2                               (27)   the majority of the NGC was covered by SDSS-II, but only a few
                                                                          stripes in the SGC were observed. These pre-observed targets ac-
            ifib2         <        21.5                            (28)   count for 43% (9%) of the LOWZ targets in the north (south). A
          rdev,i          <        20.0 pix .                      (29)   much smaller fraction of CMASS targets were pre-observed: 1.7%
                                                                          (0.7%) in the N (S).
     During commissioning (chunks 1 and 2), we used
significantly looser criteria; the CMASS COMM sample
(BOSS TARGET&&22 ), just under 25000 galaxies, was se-
lected as follows:
                                                                          4.2    Target Collation and Spectroscopic Tiling
          icmod           <        20.14 + 1.6(d⊥ − 0.8)           (30)   We start with the list of targets provided by the target selection al-
           17.5       < icmod <    20.0                            (31)   gorithms detailed above, and remove targets with known redshifts
             d⊥           >        0.55                            (32)   as defined above. The tiling algorithm assigns the remaining targets
                                                                          to spectroscopic tiles. The sky was tiled in a piecemeal fashion as
 ipsf − imod              >        0.2 + 0.2(20 − imod )           (33)
                                                                          the survey progressed; each of these regions is called a “chunk”;
rmod − imod               <        2                               (34)   see § 2.1 and Dawson et al. (2012) for further details. DR12 con-
            ifib2         <        22                              (35)   tains observations from 38 chunks. The survey mask and collated
                                                                   (36)   target catalogue both indicate the chunk to which a region or spe-
                                                                          cific object was assigned.
        See other exceptions to these criteria in Section 3.3.1.                The tiling algorithm (Blanton et al. 2003) determines the loca-
                                                                          tion of the 3◦ diameter spectroscopic tiles and allocates the avail-
                                                                          able fibres among the targets, including targets from other pro-
                                                                          grammes within BOSS. Because of the size of the cladding on the
                                                                          fibres, fibres may not lie within 62” of one another on a given spec-
3.4     Sparse Sampling Cuts                                              troscopic tile. The algorithm therefore divides target galaxies into
                                                                          friends-of-friends groups with a linking length of 6200 , and then as-
Motivated by the wish to study objects of slightly lower stellar mass
                                                                          signs fibres to the groups in a way that maximizes the number of
and bluer intrinsic colour, we designed the CMASS SPARSE sam-
                                                                          targets with fibres. The choice of which galaxies are assigned fibres
ple. It extends the CMASS selection by altering the icmod -d⊥ slid-
                                                                          is otherwise random. The algorithm adapts to the density of targets
ing colour-magnitude cut to
                                                                          on the sky, such that regions with a larger than average number
icmod      ⩾        19.86 + 1.6(d⊥ − 0.8)                          (37)   density tend to be covered by more than one tile. For the DR12
                                                                          sample, 42% (55%) of the area in the north (south) is covered by
icmod      <        20.14 + 1.6(d⊥ − 0.8) ,                        (38)
                                                                          multiple tiles, and the number density of CMASS targets is larger
with the other cuts unchanged (i.e., the area between the red and         by 4.7% (3.4%) in those regions. The tile overlap - target density
green dashed lines in the bottom panel of Fig. 4). These galaxies         correlation is less pronounced for the LOWZ sample (1.6% and
were randomly subsampled down to a number density on the sky              2.4% enhancement in north and south, respectively). The LOWZ
of 5 deg−2 , corresponding to approximately 1 in 10 targets. This         sample constitutes only 35% of the galaxy targets, and particularly
sample was selected across the full BOSS footprint.                       in the north many galaxies in dense regions already have spectra
     CMASS SPARSE galaxies may be selected with                           from the SDSS-II and thus were not targeted for SDSS-III BOSS
                                                                          spectroscopy (see Sec. 4.1).
  • BOSS TARGET1 && 23                                                          Fibre collisions are partially resolved only in the multiple
  • SPECPRIMARY == 1                                                      tile regions, and therefore may not be representative of the un-
  • ZWARNING NOQSO == 0                                                   resolved fibre collisions in lower target density regions. Fibre-
  • CLASS NOQSO == ’GALAXY’                                               collided galaxies cannot simply be accounted for by reducing the
                                                                          completeness of their sector, since they are a non-random subset
after excluding the commissioning chunks.                                 of targets (conditioned to have another target within 6200 ). As dis-
      Altering the CMASS target selection in this way produces a          cussed further in Sec. 6.1, we provide a set of weights that treat
sample of galaxies at somewhat lower redshift and stellar mass. The       these objects as if they were observed, and assign their weight to
median redshift of CMASS SPARSE is z = 0.51, with a stellar               the nearest object of the same target class. Finally, since quasar tar-
mass distribution that peaks at 1011.2 M (using the stellar masses        gets are given higher priority by the tiling algorithm, we account for
of Chen et al. 2012), relative to the peak CMASS mass of 1011.4           their presence by simply including a 6200 veto mask (see Sec. 5.1.1)
M .                                                                       around each high priority quasar target.

                                                                                                                 c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                           BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                         11
                                                                                poor wavelength coverage, broken/dropped and sky-target fibres,
                0.2                                                             and best fits which are within ∆χ2 /dof = 0.01 of the next best
                                                                                fit (comparing only to fits with a velocity difference of more than
                                                                                1000 kms−1 ). This method is a development of that used for the
               0.15                                                             SDSS DR8 (Aihara et al. 2011), and is explained in further detail
                                                                                in Bolton et al. (2012), and in Ahn et al. (2012, 2014).
    p(ifib2)                                                                          For galaxy targets, a dominant source of false identifications
                0.1                                                             is due to quasar templates with unphysical fit parameters, e.g., large
                                                                                negative amplitudes causing a quasar template emission feature to
                                                                                fit a galaxy absorption feature. Thus, for galaxy targets, the best
               0.05                                                             classification and redshift are selected only from the fits to galaxy
                                                                                and star templates, and we restrict the sample to fits the pipeline
                                                                                classifies as robust. The results of these fits are tabulated in the
                 0
                  19.5        20          20.5            21            21.5    “* NOQSO” versions of various quantities in the LSS catalogues.
                                          ifib2                                       Table 2 lists the total number of CMASS and LOWZ targets
                                                                                that were assigned a fibre within the survey footprint (N̄obs ) as
Figure 7. Normalised ifib2 distributions of redshift failures (green, dashed)   well as the breakdown for each of the three possible outcomes: the
and redshift successes (red, solid) for the CMASS sample. Redshift failures     number of CMASS and LOWZ targets robustly classified as stars
constitute 1.8% of the CMASS targets observed by SDSS-III BOSS. These           (N̄star ) or galaxies (N̄gal ), and the number of targets for which the
are contrasted against normalised distributions for the LOWZ sample of          pipeline failed to find a robust classification and redshift (N̄fail ). A
redshift failures (pink, dotted) and redshift successes (blue, dashed). Error   total of 2.3% (3.4%) of CMASS targets are stars and 1.6% (2.1%)
bars were calculated assuming Poisson statistics. Note that some LOWZ           are redshift failures in the north (south). Only 0.6% of LOWZ tar-
galaxies have ifib2 < 19.5, which is why the normalisation for LOWZ
                                                                                gets are stars and 0.5% are redshift failures.
curves looks lower than for CMASS.
                                                                                      Fig. 7 demonstrates that the pipeline is less likely to obtain
                                                                                a successful redshift for CMASS targets with fainter ifib2 magni-
4.3            Spectroscopic Reductions                                         tudes. Section 6.3 discusses how we account for this strong depen-
                                                                                dence in the redshift failure weights.
Each “tile” output from the tiling algorithm specifies a central loca-
tion on the sky and the list of targets to be observed. Physical plates
are drilled at the University of Washington based on the anticipated
airmass of observation. Multiple plates can cover the same tile, and            5     LARGE SCALE STRUCTURE CATALOGUE
plates may be observed on multiple nights until the desired signal-                   CREATION
to-noise ratio is reached (Dawson et al. 2012).
      The BOSS spectroscopic reduction pipeline is detailed in                  The creation of the BOSS large-scale structure catalogues involves
Bolton et al. (2012), with minor updates given in Alam et al. (2015).           a number of steps. We start with a list of targets based on the target
The final DR12 catalogues used the v5 7 0 tag of the IDLSPEC 2 D                selection procedure described above, with the previously known
software package5 for spectroscopic calibration, extraction, classi-            redshifts and outcome of the spectral analysis for each object for
fication, and redshift analysis. We restrict the large-scale structure          which we have a spectrum, matched to this list. Next we construct
catalogues to only include data from plates with PLATEQUALITY                   the survey mask, which specifies the regions of the sky that will be
set to “good.” The criteria for this designation are a minimum of               included in the LSS catalogues and the completeness in each in-
three exposures, the number of spectroscopic pixels flagged as bad              cluded region. Finally, we use the mask and observed redshifts to
must be less than 10%, and a minimum signal-to-noise ratio re-                  generate a set of “random” galaxies, Poisson sampling the sky cov-
quirement for both the blue and red arms of the spectrograph must               erage specified by the mask with the same expected density distri-
be met (Dawson et al. 2012).                                                    bution as the galaxies. The random galaxies are assigned redshifts
      The classification and redshift of each object are determined             to match the distribution of the target sample. Together, the data
by a Maximum Likelihood fit of the coadded spectra to a linear                  and random catalogues can be used for statistical analyses such as
combination of redshifted eigenspectra in combination with a low-               N -point functions. These steps and some of the subtleties involved
order polynomial. The polynomial (quadratic for galaxies, quasars,              are now described in detail.
and cataclysmic variable stars; cubic for all other stars) allows for
residual extinction effects or broadband continua not otherwise de-
scribed by the templates. The templates are derived from a rest-                5.1    Mask
frame principal-component analysis (PCA) of training samples of
                                                                                We use the M ANGLE software (Swanson et al. 2008) to track the
galaxies, quasars and stars using stellar population templates at the
                                                                                areas covered by the BOSS survey and the angular completeness of
BOSS resolution (from Maraston et al. 2013). The reduced χ2 ver-
                                                                                each distinct region; our terminology is summarised in Table 1. The
sus redshift is measured in redshift steps corresponding to the log-
                                                                                mask is constructed of spherical polygons, which form the base unit
arithmic pixel scale of the spectra, where ∆ log10 (λ) = 0.0001.
                                                                                for the geometrical decomposition of the sky. The angular mask of
Galaxy templates are fit from z = −0.01 to 1.00, quasar templates
                                                                                the survey is formed from the intersection of the imaging bound-
from z = 0.0033 to 7.00, and star templates from z = −0.004 to
                                                                                aries (expressed as a set of polygons) and the spectroscopic tiles.
0.004 (±1200 kms−1 ). The template fit with the best reduced χ2 is
                                                                                We define each unique intersection of spectroscopic tiles to be a
selected as the classification and redshift, with warning flags set for
                                                                                sector (see Blanton et al. 2003; Tegmark et al. 2004; Aihara et al.
                                                                                2011).
5      http://www.sdss3.org/svn/repo/idlspec2d/tags/v5 7 0/                           We compute sector completeness based on the distribution of

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
12        Reid et al.
                    Property                    NGC         SGC            total     NGC        SGC         total       NGC          NGC
                    Sample                               CMASS                                LOWZ                   LOWZE2       LOWZE3
                    N̄gal                    607,357     228,990     836,347       177,336   132,191    309,527        2,985        11,195
                    N̄known                   11,449       1,841      13,290       140,444    13,073    153,517        2,730         6,371
                    N̄star                    14,556       8,262      22,818         1,043       976      2,019           24            61
                    N̄fail                    10,188       5,157      15,345           868       602      1,470           21            55
                    N̄cp                      34,151      11,163      45,314         4,459     4,422      8,881           16           167
                    N̄missed                   7,997       3,488      11,485        10,295     3,499     13,794          114           609
                    N̄used                   568,776     208,426     777,202       248,237   113,525    361,762        4,336        15,380
                    N̄obs                    632,101     242,409     874,510       179,247   133,769    313,016        3,030        11,311
                    N̄targ                   685,698     258,901     944,599       334,445   154,763    489,208        5,890        18,458
                    Total area (deg2 )         7,429       2,823      10,252         6,451     2,823      9,274          144           834
                    Veto area (deg2 )            495         263         759           431       264        695           10            55
                    Used area (deg2 )          6,934       2,560       9,493         6,020     2,559      8,579          134           779
                    Effective area (deg2 )     6,851       2,525       9,376         5,836     2,501      8,337          131           755
                    Targets / deg2              98.9       101.1        99.5          55.6      60.5       57.0         43.4          23.5

Table 2. Basic parameters of the DR12 CMASS,LOWZ, LOWZE2, and LOWZE3 samples. We track P              these classifications on a sector-by-sector basis in order
to compute the BOSS fibre completeness in each sector of the survey. In this table we report N̄X = sectors NX , the sum over all sectors retained in the
final BOSS mask. Target classification counts and areas for the LOWZE2 and LOWZE3 samples are reported for chunk 2 and chunk 3-6, respectively. To
estimate the target density for those samples, we use the full NGC footprint to reduce cosmic variance.


targets across various outcomes of the tiling pipeline and spectro-                  in the random catalogue generation (see Sec. 5.2). By this defini-
scopic reductions. In each sector (indexed by i) included in the                     tion, the area-weighted average completeness is 99% (97%) for the
large scale structure catalog, we distinguish the following outcomes                 CMASS (LOWZ) samples. We compute the effective mask area in
(separately for each target class):                                                  Table 2 by weighting the used area of each sector by its complete-
                                                                                     ness.
   (i) galaxies with redshifts from good BOSS spectra (we denote
                                                                                           The boundaries of the spectroscopic tiles can be seen by eye
the number in each sector by Ngal,i ),
                                                                                     in Fig. 8 as discontinuities in the value of completeness; the unique
   (ii) galaxies with redshifts from pre-BOSS spectra (Nknown,i ),
                                                                                     intersection of those tiles define individual sectors, in which we
   (iii) spectroscopically-confirmed stars (Nstar,i ),
                                                                                     treat the BOSS fiber completeness as uniform. On average, the
   (iv) objects with BOSS spectra from which stellar classification
                                                                                     completeness is larger in regions covered by more than one spec-
or redshift determination failed (Nfail,i ),
                                                                                     troscopic tile. The raw sky area covered by spectroscopic tiles is
   (v) objects with no spectra, in a fibre collision group with at least
                                                                                     10338 deg2 , of which 10252 deg2 remain (7429 deg2 in the NGC
one object of the same target class (Ncp,i ), 6
                                                                                     and 2823 deg2 in the SGC) after restricting the mask to sec-
   (vi) objects with no spectra, if in a fibre collision group then
                                                                                     tors for which every planned tile has been observed with “good”
with no other objects from the same target class (Nmissed,i ).
                                                                                     PLATEQUALITY.
These quantities, summed over all sectors included in the LSS cat-                         We also define a galaxy redshift completeness, assuming that
alogues, are given in Table 2. As each target is classed by one of                   stars are always correctly classified spectroscopically
these descriptors, we have that the total number of targets in sector
                                                                                                                         Ngal,i
i is                                                                                                      Cred,i =                    ,                    (42)
                                                                                                                     Nobs,i − Nstar,i
Ntarg,i = Nstar,i +Ngal,i +Nfail,i +Ncp,i +Nmissed,i +Nknown,i ,
                                                                                     and define a target completeness
                                                          (39)
and we define the number of targets observed by BOSS as                                                              Ngal,i + Nknown,i
                                                                                                        Ctarg,i =                      ,                   (43)
                  Nobs,i = Nstar,i + Ngal,i + Nfail,i .                    (40)                                            Ntarg,i

Matching our analyses for DR9, DR10 and DR11, the LOWZ cat-                          which gives the number of good galaxies spectroscopically ob-
alogue is then cut to 0.15 < z < 0.43, and the CMASS catalogue                       served in BOSS combined with previously known redshifts divided
is cut to 0.43 < z < 0.7 to avoid overlap, and to make the samples                   by the number of targets calculated in each sector. Fig. 9 shows the
independent. The number of galaxies used in the final catalogue                      fraction of the total BOSS area that has target completeness greater
Nused is the subset of Ngal,i + Nknown,i that pass these redshift                    than a specified value, and how this would change if we coud ig-
cuts.                                                                                nore various effects. This shows the relative importance of different
      From these descriptions, we define a BOSS fibre completeness                   categories of targets to the target completness of BOSS, from the
in sector i                                                                          least important, which is redshift failures, to fibre collisions, which
                                                                                     is the most important.
                               Nobs,i + Ncp,i
  CBOSS,i =                                                   . (41)                       Previous LSS catalogues (DR9, DR10, DR11) had to deal with
               Nstar,i + Ngal,i + Nfail,i + Ncp,i + Nmissed,i                        sizeable regions where BOSS spectra were not complete, and we
This completeness definition excludes the “known” objects ob-                        made a number of cuts on sectors to include in the LSS catalogues
served by SDSS-II. CBOSS,i , shown in Fig. 8, is recorded in the                     to minimise the impact of this effect. In particular, sectors meeting
mangle mask files released with the LSS catalogues and is used                       any of the following criteria were removed from the LSS mask:

                                                                                       • CBOSS,i < 0.7 (Eqn. 41); removing part-complete sectors on
6   cp is used because each galaxy exists in a “close-pair” with another             the edges of the survey missing a significant fraction of redshifts.

                                                                                                                             c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                               BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                           13




Figure 8. Completeness maps for both the LOWZ and CMASS samples in the north and south Galactic caps. The mean completeness is 98.8% for the CMASS
sample shown in the left panels, and 97.2% for the LOWZ sample in the right-hand panels. Gaps correspond to early chunks as shown in Fig. A1. Each patch
of different colour corresponds to a plate, with the colour determined by the completeness of that plate. This is surrounded by the higher completeness regions
that overlap that plate with other plates. This leaves a pattern that looks like a darker, higher-completeness mesh, covering the survey.


   • Cred,i < 0.8 (Eqn. 42) and Ngal,i > 10; removing regions                      of a spectroscopic tile can be observed. This mask reduces the sur-
with bad spectroscopic observations.                                               vey area by 0.04%.
   • Nobs,i = 0 and there is not another sector within 2 ◦ in the ±                   • Collision priority mask: Ly−α quasar targets receive higher
right ascension or declination directions; removing isolated regions               priority than BOSS galaxy targets in the tiling algorithm; in re-
without galaxies.                                                                  gions of only a single spectroscopic tile, BOSS galaxy targets are
                                                                                   unobservable within a fibre collision radius (6200 ) of those targets.
      But this was not done for the DR12 sample. If we had addi-                   Treating the high-priority quasar target locations as uncorrelated
tionally applied the fibre completeness cut (first criterion above),               with the galaxy density field and neglecting any recovered galaxy
for DR12 we would have rejected an additional 30 (56) deg2 from                    targets in tile overlap regions, we can simply account for the high-
the CMASS (LOWZ) mask; if instead we had applied the red-                          priority quasars by masking a 6200 radius around each. This mask
shift success cut in DR12 (second criterion above), we would have                  reduces the survey area by 1.5%.
rejected an additional 1.7 (1.4) deg2 from the CMASS (LOWZ)
                                                                                      • Bright stars mask: We mask an area around stars in the Ty-
mask. The difference between the earlier mask selection and the
                                                                                   cho catalogue (Høg et al. 2000) with Tycho BT magnitude within
algorithm described above applied to DR12 constitute negligible
                                                                                   [6,11.5] with magnitude-dependent radius
changes on the survey mask. The two algorithms agree to within
0.3% of the total mask area for both the CMASS and LOWZ sam-                                R = (0.0802BT2 − 1.860BT + 11.625) arcmin.                    (44)
ples. Finally, the classification of Ncp,i and Nmissed,i has slightly
changed in DR12 relative to DR9-DR11; see Sec. 6.1.                                This mask reduces the area by 1.9%.
                                                                                      • Bright objects mask: The standard bright star mask occasion-
                                                                                   ally misses some bright stars that impact the SDSS imaging data
5.1.1   Veto Masks                                                                 quality. Additionally, a small number of bright local galaxies satu-
While the basic geometry of the survey is encapsulated in the sur-                 rate the imaging as well, affecting target selection in their outskirts.
vey mask described in the previous sections, there remain many                     These objects were identified by visual inspection, and the mask
small regions within it where we could not have observed galax-                    radii for each object were also determined in this manner, ranging
ies. Although they are individually small, they are not randomly                   from 0.1 ◦ to 1.5 ◦ . The number of objects in this mask is ∼ 125,
distributed across the sky, and sum to a significant area, and so we               subtending a total area of 43.8 deg2 . The list of objects is described
exclude them from any analysis. We represent those regions by a set                in section 2.1 of (Rykoff et al. 2014). This mask covers 0.4% of the
of veto masks, and remove “randoms” that fall within these masks.                  BOSS area.
The masks are:                                                                        • Non-photometric conditions mask: We mask regions where
                                                                                   the imaging was not photometric in g, r, or i bands, the PSF mod-
  • Centerpost mask: Each Sloan plate is secured to the focal                      elling failed, the imaging reduction pipeline timed out (usually due
plane by a central bolt: no targets coinciding with the centerpost                 to too many blended objects in a single field, caused by a high stel-

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
14       Reid et al.
                                                                              5.2    Random Catalogue generation
                                                                              All of our clustering analyses make use of random catalogues with
                                                                              the same angular and redshift selection functions as the data. To
                                                                              produce these catalogues, we first use the M ANGLE ransack com-
                                                                              mand to generate one ≈ 10× and two ≈ 50× catalogues, where
                                                                              the angular density of the random galaxies is proportional to the
                                                                              completeness value in the mask for each sector7 . As the random
                                                                              catalogue follows the redshift completeness per sector, it automat-
                                                                              ically corrects for any systematic effects caused by the decrease
                                                                              in fiducial exposure times starting roughly half-way through the
                                                                              BOSS survey. Next we remove random galaxies using the set of
                                                                              veto masks described in Sec. 5.1.1. Only the angular coordinates
                                                                              of the 10× random catalogue are used to fit for angular system-
                                                                              atic weights; see Sec. 6.4. Since the true underlying redshift distri-
                                                                              bution of our targets is unknown and can only be estimated from
                                                                              the empirical redshift distribution, we assign redshifts to the galax-
                                                                              ies in the two 50× random catalogues by randomly drawing from
                                                                              the measured galaxy redshifts, but with a weight for each galaxy
                                                                              given by wtot,i , defined in Eq. (50). This procedure ensures that
                                                                              the (weighted) galaxy and random catalogues have exactly the same
                                                                              redshift distribution, apart from (small) stochasticity from the ran-
                                                                              dom redshift assignment. Ross et al. (2012) compare this random
Figure 9. The fraction of the total survey area that has a target complete-   redshift assignment scheme with approaches that fit a spline of
ness greater than the value shown, where target completeness is defined       varying knot number to the measured galaxy redshift distribution,
as the number of good galaxies spectroscopically observed in BOSS and         and then sample from the resulting spline directly. Based on anal-
those with previously known redshifts divided by the number of targets
                                                                              ysis of mock catalogues, their figure 19 demonstrates that the for-
calculated in each sector as Ctarg,i = (Ngal,i + Nknown,i )/Ntarg,i ,
                                                                              mer method provides the smallest bias in fits to the monopole and
as in Eq. (43). We compare this completeness with those we would have
obtained had we not had to include various classes of targets. If there       quadrupole correlation function.
had been no stars in our target list, the completeness would have been
(Ngal,i + Nknown,i )/(Ntarg,i − Nstar,i ) (green line). If additionally we
had not had to deal with fibre collisions, we would have observed a com-      6     ACCOUNTING FOR OBSERVATIONAL ARTEFACTS
pleteness (Ngal,i + Nknown,i + Ncp,i )/(Ntarg,i − Nstar,i ) (blue line),
                                                                                    IN LSS CATALOGUES
and if additionally there were no redshift failures (Ngal,i + Nknown,i +
Ncp,i + Nfail,i )/(Ntarg,i − Nstar,i ) (black line). From the definition of   In this section we describe in detail how we weight the targeted
Ntarg,i in Eq. (39) we see that the remaining decrement of the black line     galaxies when computing LSS statistics, in order to minimize the
from Ctarg,i = 1 is due to missed galaxies Nmissed,i .                        impact of observational artefacts on our estimate of the true galaxy
                                                                              overdensity field. We identify various effects that affect the com-
                                                                              pleteness of the sample, which we quantify with weights applied
                                                                              per sector. These weights are a development of those presented in
                                                                              Anderson et al. (2012, 2014b). In particular, we discuss treatment
                                                                              of “known” redshifts from SDSS-II that were not re-observed in
lar density), or the image was identified as having any other critical        SDSS-III BOSS, galaxies not observed due to fibre collisions, ob-
problems. This mask reduces the area by 3.4%.                                 served galaxies for which a robust redshift was not obtained, and a
   • Seeing cut: we discard regions where the point spread function           weighting scheme to null non-cosmological fluctuations imprinted
full width half maximum (labeled ’PSF FHWM’ in the catalogues)                on the catalogue by the target selection step. The weights described
is greater than 2.3, 2.1, 2.0 in the g, r, and i band, respectively.          below are available for each galaxy in the LSS catalogues. In this
The rationale for this cut is to decrease the variation of target den-        section we also summarise weights we apply to minimize our sta-
sity and properties with seeing due to the star galaxy separation             tistical error on the observed power spectrum.
(Eqns. 12, 20, and 21) and ifib2 cuts. This cut removes an addi-
tional 0.5% (1.7%) of the NGC (SGC) footprint.
   • Extinction cut: for similar reasons, we also discard areas               6.1    Fibre collision corrections
where the E(B − V ) extinction (labeled ’EB MINUS V’ in the
catalogues, from Schlegel, Finkbeiner & Davis 1998) exceeds 0.15.             Galaxies that were not assigned a spectroscopic fibre due to fibre
This cut removes an additional 0.06% (2.2%) of the NGC (SGC)                  collisions are not a random subsample of the full target sample
footprint.                                                                    since they are within a fibre collision radius (6200 ) of another target.
                                                                              This is potentially a large effect: in the SGC, where the coverage
     In the catalogue creation pipeline, the list of targets is imme-
diately passed through these veto masks, so that targets in vetoed            7 To exactly reproduce the officially released random catalogues, one must
regions do not contribute to the sector completeness calculation.             use the ransack version included in the SDSS idlutils product with version
All random galaxies within the veto regions must also be removed.             v5 4 25 or higher (Surhud More, private communication). Random seeds
Table 2 shows that in total, 6.6% (9.3%) of the area within the north         input to ransack are provided in the catalogue generation scripts accompa-
(south) galactic cap footprint was removed by the veto masks.                 nying MKSAMPLE.

                                                                                                                      c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                     BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                       15
of known targets from SDSS-II is lowest, approximately 20% of             fibre. These galaxies are treated as random incompleteness in the
galaxy targets are in a collision group containing other CMASS or         survey coverage and comprise 0.14% of the total galaxy sample.
LOWZ galaxy targets. As a result, 5.8% of CMASS targets and                  • Finally, 0.3% of targets did not receive a fibre due to collisions
3.3% of LOWZ targets were not assigned a spectroscopic fibre.             with targets other than CMASS and LOWZ but of the same priority.
      These objects preferentially occupy denser environments and         Again we treat these missing redshifts as random.
therefore have higher than average large-scale bias. They are also
                                                                          Tables 3 and 4 provide statistics about the distribution of CMASS
more likely than average to occupy the same dark matter halo as
                                                                          and LOWZ galaxies in fibre collision groups and how the proba-
a neighbouring galaxy target. Accurate fibre collision corrections
                                                                          bility of assigning a fibre to a pair of collided galaxies in the same
are therefore particularly important for applications relying on the
                                                                          fibre collision group depends on the size of the collision group. Ap-
absolute value of galaxy bias (i.e., in a comparison of the lensing
                                                                          proximately 75% of collided galaxies are in a group of only two,
and clustering amplitude) or those that use small-scale clustering to
                                                                          and group sizes above four are quite rare. In Table 4, ffibre reports
deduce halo occupation statistics and satellite fractions.
                                                                          the fraction of galaxies in a collision group that received a spec-
      In the default large-scale structure catalogue that focuses on      troscopic fibre, as a function of ntiles , the number of spectroscopic
obtaining unbiased galaxy density fields on large scales, we sim-         tiles covering their sector. In the remaining columns we report the
ply upweight the nearest galaxy from the same target class that was       fraction of pairs of CMASS+LOWZ targets in the same collision
assigned a fibre to account for collided galaxies that were not as-       group for which both targets received a fibre, both globally (cpair ),
signed fibres. This information is tracked by incrementing a weight       and as a function of ngroup . In regions covered by a single spec-
wcp , labelled WEIGHT CP in the DR12 LSS catalogues. The up-              troscopic tile, only a small fraction of pairs with ngroup = 2 both
weighted nearest neighbour could be classified by the spectroscopic       receive a spectroscopic fibre (4%). Such pairs must be sourced from
pipeline as a good galaxy redshift, a star, or a redshift failure. Up-    collision groups containing at least one target of another class, ori-
weighting the neighbour without reference to its classification is        ented such that the two CMASS/LOWZ targets in the group are
the appropriate thing to do as the missed object could be in any of       separated by more than 6200 . As expected, for ntiles > 1 pairs in
these classes.                                                            smaller collision groups are more likely to be resolved, and the ma-
      We correct 34151 (11163) CMASS targets and 4459 (4422)              jority of fibre collisions are removed.
LOWZ targets by nearest neighbour upweighting in the NGC                        Finally, to understand the impact of fibre collision corrections
(SGC). This amounts to 5.0% (4.3%) of CMASS targets in the                on our estimate of the true galaxy density field, we examine the
NGC (SGC), and 1.3% (2.9%) of the LOWZ targets. The differ-               apparent separation for pairs of galaxies in the same fibre colli-
ence between the hemispheres is due both to higher tile density           sion group for which good redshifts were obtained for both. Fig. 10
in the SGC (so more fibre collisions fall in overlap regions where        shows the distribution near ∆z ≈ 0, although the tails extend to
they can be partially resolved) and to most of the previously known       much larger separations. We have converted redshift separations
SDSS-II redshifts falling in the NGC.                                     to apparent distance separations using the fiducial cosmological
      The algorithm used to generate the DR12 catalogues differs          model. The observed distribution (coloured lines) can be fit by a flat
slightly from the one used for the DR9-DR11 catalogues. The new           background and an exponential distribution centered on ∆z = 0
algorithm uses the output from the tiling algorithm to determine          (black lines). The fraction of resolved fibre collision pairs that are
membership in fibre collision groups. Targets with the same ’FI-          “correlated” (i.e., contribute to the exponential component in the fit
NALN’ and ’INGROUP’ field flags output from the tiling code               to the pairwise separation histogram) is 52% for pairs of CMASS
share a collision group. We choose the nearest object of the same         targets and 62% for pairs of LOWZ targets, i.e., nearly half of fi-
target class and collision group to carry the weight of the unob-         bre collision pairs are unassociated projections. Interestingly, the
served target. We also allow “known” galaxies to carry the weight         width of the distribution is consistent with σexp = 5.4 h−1 Mpc for
if they are closer than all BOSS-observed targets. In DR9-DR11            both target classes and is generally consistent with halo modeling
catalogues, we did not refer to the fibre collision group indices, but    expectations.
simply identified collision pairs in the same target class if they were         Since the choice of which galaxies are assigned fibres in a
separated by less than 6200 . Nonetheless, the two algorithms select      collision group is completely random (apart from maximising the
the same nearest neighbour ∼ 94% of the time.                             number of targets receiving a fibre), the object not assigned a fibre
      Our adopted fibre collision correction scheme neglects a few        is statistically equivalent to the one we upweight, and so once up-
subtle cases:                                                             weighted correlations at transverse separations larger than the fibre
                                                                          collision scale should be unbiased. However, correlations at trans-
                                                                          verse separations below the collision scale will be biased, since
   • No corrections are applied for objects that are the only mem-
                                                                          we are removing these small scale pairs. Additionally, these small-
bers of their target class in their fibre collision group, and did not
                                                                          scale variations will be anisotropic, and therefore likely to have a
receive a fibre. For CMASS, this class represents 4% of all targets
                                                                          stronger affect on the quadrupole, rather than monopole moments
in fibre collision groups, and 0.7% of all CMASS targets overall.
                                                                          of 2-point clustering statistics, for example. We therefore advocate
Since there are more CMASS targets per unit area, this effect is
                                                                          constructing statistics that do not apply these weights in situations
larger for LOWZ targets: 12% of all collided LOWZ targets and
                                                                          where these effects are important; see Reid et al. (2014) for an ex-
1.4% of the full sample. Treating such collision pairs as unassoci-
                                                                          ample configuration space statistic.
ated is still a good approximation. To verify this assumption, we ex-
amined all collision groups consisting of a single LOWZ target and
single CMASS target, and for which we obtained both redshifts.
                                                                          6.2   Treatment of “known” targets
Only 11% of such pairs had line-of-sight separations smaller than
50 h−1 Mpc.                                                               As the pre-observed “known” sample is complete (no failures are
   • No corrections are applied when none of the multiple objects         kept), it does not match the angular distribution induced by varia-
of the same target class in a fibre collision group were assigned a       tions in completeness of the galaxies spectroscopically observed by

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
16             Reid et al.

Table 3. Distribution of galaxies across fibre collision group sizes. The           BOSS. Rather than try to model the distribution of known galaxies,
largest collisions group (not listed) contains 17 galaxy targets. The first         we instead subsampled these data to match BOSS completeness in
column provides the fraction of CMASS targets in groups with ngroup                 each sector, thus imposing the BOSS mask on the known galax-
CMASS targets, restricted to groups with at least two CMASS targets. The            ies. In this way we make the sample indistinguishable from BOSS-
second column shows the same calculation for LOWZ targets. The final col-           observed targets. In earlier data releases (DR9-11) we also marked
umn lists the fibre collision group size distribution, where ngroup includes        a fraction of the galaxies in a 6200 close pair containing at least one
both CMASS and LOWZ targets. For consistency across the mask these re-              object from the “known” sample as fibre-collided; we did not apply
sults were computed from the LOWZ sample footprint (chunks ⩾ 7). For
                                                                                    this step in our DR12 analysis and describe the difference in more
reference, the fraction of galaxies that are not in any collision group is 77%.
                                                                                    detail in the next section.
                   ngroup      fCMASS      fLOWZ        fC+L                              In DR9-DR11 catalogues we additionally marked a fraction of
                   2           0.7631      0.8456       0.7566                      the galaxies in a 6200 close pair containing at least one object from
                   3           0.1687      0.1182       0.1726                      the “known” sample as fibre-collided, and assigned its weight to
                   4           0.0440      0.0270       0.0461                      its nearest neighbour. This fraction was determined by measuring
                   5           0.0146      0.0070       0.0150                      the fraction of 6200 BOSS targets that were fibre collision corrected
                   6           0.0059      0.0010       0.0057
                                                                                    in each sector. In sectors covered only by a single spectroscopic
                   7           0.0023      0.0005       0.0022
                   8           0.0007      0.0003       0.0008
                                                                                    tile all 6200 pairs were collided. The original motivation of this cor-
                   9           0.0003      0.0006       0.0003                      rection was to impose the same fibre collision completeness on the
                                                                                    “known” targets as the BOSS targets. In DR12 we did not apply this
                                                                                    correction. The rationale was that on sufficiently large scales the
Table 4. Fibre collision statistics for targets in regions covered by ntiles        nearest neighbour upweighting scheme restores the correct cluster-
spectroscopic tiles. The second column shows the fraction of the total mask
                                                                                    ing statistics, and so should therefore be equivalent to using the
area covered by ntiles tiles. The third column gives ffibre , the fraction of all
                                                                                    measured redshifts. However, we expect the effective shot noise to
collided galaxies that were assigned a fibre. The remaining columns specify
the fraction of pairs of galaxy targets (CMASS + LOWZ) in the same colli-           be larger when using the former procedure. Correlation function
sion group for which both targets received a fibre, both globally (cpair ), and     and power spectrum analyses that marginalize over a shot noise
as a function of ngroup . We use the global fraction cpair to remove collided       term should be unaffected by this choice; analyses of smaller-scale
pairs and approximate the fibre collision effect in our mock galaxy cata-           clustering should examine this issue further. This change is partic-
logues. We track cpair separately for the NGC and SGC and for CMASS,                ularly important for clustering of the LOWZ sample because of the
LOWZ or combined catalogues, but in practice the values are similar in              large overlap with the “known” galaxy sample.
each case to those reported here.

  ntiles        farea     ffibre   cpair    cpair (2)    cpair (3)     cpair (4)
                                                                                    6.3   Redshift Failures
  1             0.54      0.561    0.092    0.042        0.159         0.142
  2             0.41      0.945    0.820    0.971        0.685         0.589        For 1.8% (0.5%) of CMASS (LOWZ) targets, the spectroscopic
  3             0.05      0.992    0.966    0.992        0.985         0.915        pipeline fails to obtain a robust redshift. We do not necessarily ex-
  4             0.0005    1.000    1.000    1.000        1.000         -            pect these to be distributed randomly with respect to e.g., plate cen-
                                                                                    ter or redshift, and so we again adopt a nearest neighbour upweight-
                                                                                    ing scheme to account for these objects. Redshift failure galax-
                                                                                    ies were permitted to be upweighted because of a nearest neigh-
        0.06 σexp = 5.4 h−1 Mpc                σexp = 5.4 h−1 Mpc                   bour fibre collision. We therefore transfer the total weight to the
        0.05                                                                        nearest neighbour of the redshift failure, incrementing a weight
                            CMASS                            LOWZ                   wnoz , labelled WEIGHT NOZ in the DR12 LSS catalogues. The
        0.04                pexp =0.52                       pexp =0.62             upweighted object must be classified either as a good galaxy or star
p(∆z)   0.03                                                                        redshift.
                                                                                          In DR9-DR11 large-scale structure catalogues we removed
        0.02                                                                        sectors with redshift success rates below 80% and at least ten good
        0.01                                                                        redshifts; in our DR12 catalogue we exclude troublesome observa-
                                                                                    tions by restricting mask regions with PLATEQUALITY of ’good’,
        0.00                                                                        and do not remove the handful of sectors that would have been
               30 20 10 0 10 20 30          30 20 10 0 10 20 30
                    ∆z [h−1 Mpc]                 ∆z [h−1 Mpc]                       excluded using the DR9-11 criteria. Upon closer examination, we
                                                                                    found that sectors failing the DR9-11 cut contained a small num-
Figure 10. The probability distribution of apparent line-of-sight separations       ber of targets and therefore subject to small number statistics; we
for pairs of galaxies in the same fibre collision group and for which both          checked that targets in those sectors were drawn from plates with
have good redshifts. The left panel uses pairs of CMASS targets and the
                                                                                    high redshift success rates.
right panel uses pairs of LOWZ targets. Both distributions can be fit with the
                                                                                          In DR9-11 we searched for redshift failure neighbours to up-
sum of a background term and an exponential: ae−|∆z|/σ + b in the range
|∆z| < 50 h−1 Mpc. A total of 52% (62%) of the CMASS (LOWZ) pairs                   weight only in the same sector; in the DR12 catalogue we only
contribute to the exponential term. The best fit width σ of the exponential         consider neighbours observed on the same plate (which spans mul-
component is 5.4 h−1 Mpc for both CMASS and LOWZ targets.                           tiple sectors) and same date, which restricts the neighbour search
                                                                                    to galaxies observed under approximately the same conditions, and
                                                                                    means the weighted number of classified objects in each sector
                                                                                    matches the number of targets. The majority of close neighbours re-
                                                                                    stricted to the same sector vs. restricted to the same plate and date
                                                                                    are the same neighbour. The median angular separation between
                                                                                    galaxies without a good redshift and their closest neighbour using

                                                                                                                           c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                     BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                       17
the updated algorithm is 3.70 (3.90 ) in the north (south), compared      pixels with nside = 1024 over the primary SDSS galaxies in the
with 2.90 using the sector-based algorithm. Total counts of redshift      DR8 Catalogue Archive Server. For DR12, we instead directly
failures for CMASS and LOWZ galaxies are listed in Table 2.               query the imaging data to determine the conditions estimated for
      In CMASS, redshift failures are more likely to occur on faint       each galaxy’s parent imaging field. Per-object and per-field seeing
targets - see Fig. 7. In the weighting scheme described above the         estimates are calculated differently. Empirically, these two meth-
neighbouring, up-weighted, galaxies are drawn from the distribu-          ods for determining Si differ by a factor of ∼ 0.9. There is also
tion of observed galaxies, which in turn are brighter on average than     scatter between per-field and per-object estimates of sky flux and
the galaxies that failed to yield a good redshift. Given the slight       airmass. The DR12 galaxy and random catalogues contain fields
correlation of ifib2 with redshift, this introduces a small redshift-     for ’PSF FWHM’, ’AIRMASS’, ’SKYFLUX’, ’EB MINUS V’,
dependent bias on the LSS catalogues. To ameliorate this effect,          and ’IMAGE DEPTH’ if users want to further explore system-
we modify the redshift-failure weights such that the weighted dis-        atics relationships. In what follows, the i-band seeing Si =
tribution of ifib2 of the corrective weight matches the ifib2 of the      PSF FWHM[3]. For DR12 we adopted a slightly different param-
targets with failed redshifts. In practice, acknowledging that an         eter convention from that of earlier catalogues9 :
up-weighted galaxy might be a neighbour to more than one red-                                                              −1
shift failure, we compute wnoz,new = 1 + (wnoz,old − 1)wif ib2 ,                                  −1              Si − Bsee
                                                                                     wsee (S) = Asee 1 − erf                      .      (46)
where wif ib2 = n(if ib2 , noz)/n(if ib2 , cp) with n(if ib2 , noz)                                                  σsee
and n(if ib2 , cp) corresponding to the green and red lines of Fig. 7
                                                                          In addition, we fit the systematic relationship separately for the
respectively. To avoid wif ib2 being dominated by Poisson noise
                                                                          NGC and SGC, again restricting the fits to objects in the CMASS
in any given bin of if ib2 , we set wif ib2 = 1 for any bin where
                                                                          LSS catalogues with 0.35 < z < 1.0. The DR12 parameter values
n(if ib2 , noz) or n(i
                    Pf ib2 , cp) are less
                                       Pthan ten. The weights are nor-    are Asee = 0.5205 (0.5344), Bsee = 2.844 (2.267), and σsee =
malised such that       wnoz,new =        wnoz,old . This scheme effec-
                                                                          1.236 (0.906) for the NGC and SGC, respectively. In DR10/DR11
tively transfers weight from bright to faint neighbours of redshift-
                                                                          we also set wsee (Si > 200 .5) = wsee (Si = 200 .5); this action is no
failure weights. We only apply this extra correction to CMASS for
                                                                          longer necessary since the DR12 veto masks remove all area with
two reasons: firstly the LOWZ redshift-failure rate is very small
                                                                          Si > 200 .0.
(0.5%) and, secondly, we find no significant dependence of red-
                                                                               Finally, the application of the CMASS z-band star/galaxy sep-
shift failure with ifib2 for LOWZ targets.
                                                                          aration cut in the LOWZE3 sample induced a significant depen-
                                                                          dence on the sample number density with Si that varies with the
6.4    Angular Systematic Weights                                         i-band model magnitude; see Ross et al. (2015) for details. The
                                                                          systematic weight for this sample is
For the DR12 data we follow the same approach as described in
                                                                                       ` = max −2, b + m(imod − 16.)−0.5
                                                                                                                                     
Ross et al. (2012) and updated in Anderson et al. (2014b) to re-                                                                            (47)
move non-cosmological fluctuations in CMASS target density with                                                               −1 
                                                                          wsee,LOWZE3 = min 5, (1. + (Si − 1.25)`)                          (48)
stellar density and seeing. The LOWZ targets are brighter and do
not show significant variations with these quantities, so LOWZ tar-       with parameters b = 0.875 and m = −2.226, fit using all objects
gets do not require these weights.                                        in the LOWZE3 catalogue with 0.2 < z < 0.5, including objects
      In DR12 we update the nside = 128 HEALPix8 stellar density          in chunks ⩾ 6 in addition to the LOWZE3 targeted region, chunks
map to include all stars with i-band magnitudes between 17.5 and          3-6.
19.9; the map used in DR10/DR11 did not impose the 17.5 bright                 The total angular systematic weights are simply the product of
cut. The two maps also differ by a factor of the pixel area, 0.210        wstar and wsee for each object with index i:
deg−2 . The functional form for wstar was also updated in DR12 to
                                                                                                wsystot,i = wstar,i wsee,i                  (49)
be the inverse of a linear relation:
               wstar (ns , ifib2 ) = (Aifib2 + Bifib2 ns )−1 ,    (45)
while in DR10/DR11 wstar was linearly dependent on ns ; see               6.5   Total Galaxy Weights
Ross et al. (2015) for details. These two differences explain the
                                                                          Finally, we combine the angular systematics weight wsystot,i with
changes to the values of the Aifib2 and Bifib2 parameters be-
                                                                          the fibre collision and redshift failure nearest neighbour weights to
tween DR10/DR11 and DR12. The DR12 parameter values for
                                                                          produce a final weight for each object i in the final catalog:
wstar , determined using all galaxies in the CMASS catalog with
0.35 < z < 1.0, are Aifib2 = [0.959, 0.994, 1.038, 1.087, 1.120]                        wtot,i = wsystot,i (wcp,i + wnoz,i − 1).            (50)
and Bifib2 = [0.826, 0.149, −0.782, −1.83, −2.52] × 10−4 , com-
puted in computed in 0.3 magnitude width ifib2 bins centred at            Since the default values of both wcp,i and wnoz,i are 1, the term
[20.45, 20.75, 21.05, 21.35], as in Anderson et al. (2014b). The pa-      in parentheses conserves the total number of galaxy targets. This
rameter wstar is determined for each galaxy by first linearly inter-      is the galaxy weighting consistent with the construction of the LSS
polating the Aifib2 and Bifib2 fits to derive a value at each galaxy’s    catalogues provided, and must be used to obtain unbiased estimates
ifib2 , and then using Eq. 45. The distribution of weight values is       of the galaxy density field, since this weight is used when assigning
similar in the NGC and SGC and, overall, 93% of CMASS galax-              the random galaxy redshifts; see Sec. 5.2.
ies have 0.95 < wstar < 1.1.
       For DR10/DR11 analyses, a map of the DR8 i-band seeing,
Si , was created by taking the mean seeing value within HEALPix           9  Eq. 20 of Anderson et al. (2014b) should state wsee (S) =
                                                                                 h                  i−1
                                                                                            Si −Bsee
                                                                          2A−1see 1 − erf     σsee
                                                                                                          for the parameter values listed in that
8   http://healpix.jpl.nasa.gov/                                          text.

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
18       Reid et al.
6.6   Angular Density and Redshift Distribution                                                      8
We estimate the angular density of galaxy targets as the total num-                                                                         CMASS
ber of targets within the final LSS mask divided by the total non-                                   7                                      LOWZ
vetoed area within the sample LSS mask. The values for each target                                                                          LOWZE2
class are listed in the final line of Table 2.10 We convert this angu-                               6                                      LOWZE3
lar target density into a three-dimensional space density through a                                                                         CMASS+LOWZ




                                                                                 104 n̄ [h−1 Mpc]3
properly normalised redshift probability distribution:
                                  X                 X                                                5
      p(zj , zj + dz)dz ∝                  wtot,i /   wtot,i ,    (51)
                              zi ∈[zj ,zj +dz]                                                       4
where we sum over all objects in the catalogue with good spectro-
scopic redshifts, and wtot,i is the total weight assigned to target i                                3
to account for various observational artefacts (Eq. 50). The inclu-
sion of wsystot,i in the estimate for p(z) accounts for any impact                                   2
of the angular systematics on the (normalised) redshift distribution,
through e.g., the ifib2 dependence of the stellar weights. However,
                                                                                                     1
our estimator for the angular target density does not recover the
true target density in the absence of stars and imperfect seeing,
                                                                                                     0
but an average target density over the survey footprint. Finally, we                                 0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4        0.5      0.6   0.7    0.8
use the fiducial cosmology to determine the number of targets per
h−3 Mpc3 . The result is shown in Fig. 11 for all four target classes,
                                                                                                                               z
as well as the sum of the CMASS and LOWZ sample number densi-
ties (with duplicate CMASS and LOWZ targets counted only once).                  Figure 11. Number density of all four target classes assuming our fidu-
The CMASS+LOWZ number density reaches a local minimum in                         cial cosmology with Ωm = 0.31, along with the sum of the CMASS and
                                                                                 LOWZ number densities (black).
the overlap region of n̄(z = 0.41) = 2.2 × 10−4 h−3 Mpc3 . As
reported in the previous sections, survey incompleteness, fibre col-
lisions, redshift failures, and stars in the target sample all reduce            ‘WEIGHT FKP’ in the DR12 galaxy and random catalogues is
the average angular density of good galaxy redshifts compared to                 given by
the angular target density; their aggregate impact is a 10% (4.4%)
reduction for CMASS (LOWZ). Finally, we compute the effective                                                                     1
                                                                                                                 wFKP,i =                                (53)
volume Veff , which quantifies the reach of a sample for making                                                             1 + n̄(zi )P0
cosmological measurements, for the CMASS and LOWZ samples                        for an object with redshift zi , where n̄(zi ) is computed by lin-
following the same algorithm outlined in Anderson et al. (2014b),                ear interpolation over bins with ∆z = 0.005 starting at z = 0.
summing over 200 redshift shells                                                 The wFKP weight is optional in LSS analyses. To utilize these
                       X  n̄(zi )P0 2                                          weights in a large scale structure analysis, one must weight both
               Veff =                          ∆V (zi ) ,         (52)           data and random objects; the final weight of galaxy i is therefore
                        i
                             1 + n̄(zi )P0
                                                                                 wtot,i wFKP,i and the final weight of random object j is wFKP,j . If
where ∆V (zi ) is the volume of the shell at zi , and we assume that             one does not use the FKP weights (i.e., as in Reid et al. 2014), con-
P0 = 10 000 h−3 Mpc3 , which we have changed since DR11, so                      sistent weightings of the galaxy and random catalogues are wtot,i
the numbers are not directly comparable to Anderson et al. (2014b).              and wj = 1, respectively.
We find Veff = 5.1 Gpc3 for CMASS and 2.3 Gpc3 for LOWZ.                              Earlier data releases adopted a different fiducial cosmology
                                                                                 and assumed P0 = 20000 h−3 Mpc3 to compute wFKP . Perci-
                                                                                 val, Verde, & Peacock (2004) updated the analysis of Feldman,
6.7   FKP weights                                                                Kaiser & Peacock (1994) to a weighting scheme that accounts for
                                                                                 luminosity-dependent clustering; such weights will be presented
Feldman, Kaiser & Peacock (1994), hereafter FKP, showed that                     for the BOSS galaxy samples in a forthcoming BOSS team pa-
the optimal weighting of galaxies as a function of redshift de-                  per. However, because our target selection algorithm is so efficient
pends on the number density of galaxy tracers. The optimal weight                at selecting massive galaxies, the gain provided by luminosity-
wFKP depends on the amplitude of the power spectrum in the                       dependent weights is modest for our sample.
power spectrum bin of interest. In practice, we use the same value
P0 = 10000 h−3 Mpc3 to estimate both the power spectrum and
correlation function on all scales. This value of P0 corresponds
to the observed power spectrum at k ≈ 0.15 hMpc−1 . The field                    7       COMBINED CATALOGUE CREATION
                                                                                 For the purpose of providing a maximally contiguous three dimen-
10
                                                                                 sional density field estimate, in DR12 we provide a new catalogue
   Our calculation of the ’NBAR’ field in the galaxy and random          cata-
                                                                                 that combines the CMASS sample with the three lower redshift
logues estimates the angular density of the sample as A−1
                                                                 P
                                                             eff    i (wcp +
wnoz − 1). Here Aeff is the completeness weighted area inside the mask           samples: LOWZE2 (chunk 2), LOWZE3 (chunks 3-6), and LOWZ
and the sum is over all galaxies in the catalogue with good redshifts. This      (chunks ⩾ 7). See Appendix A for details of the LOWZE2 and
method is slightly noisier since the completeness in each region is estimated    LOWZE3 samples. A precise geometric description of the sky area
from a finite number of galaxies. We verified that the two methods agree to      covered by each sample is provided in mangle mask format, con-
within 0.02%.                                                                    structed such that every sector included in the CMASS mask is

                                                                                                                                c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                    BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                      19
included in exactly one of the LOWZE2, LOWZE3, or LOWZ                   Although this is expected to be small due to the relatively benign
footprints. We also construct two additional masks, one includ-          transition from LOWZ to CMASS (Ross et al. 2015), a full explo-
ing the LOWZE2 + LOWZ sky coverage and another including the             ration of this issue is left for a forthcoming BOSS team paper.
LOWZE3 + LOWZ sky coverage.
      Using those masks, we first generate a LOWZE2 catalogue
including chunk 2 and chunks ⩾ 7 and a LOWZE3 catalogue
                                                                         8   DISCUSSION
including chunks ⩾ 3 using the target selection algorithms de-
tailed in Appendix A. This is possible since all the galaxies passing    The small statistical errors achievable on cosmological measure-
LOWZE2 and LOWZE3 cuts will also pass the LOWZ cuts. Pro-                ments from BOSS data require removal of potential systematic is-
ducing a catalogue across a larger fraction of the sky allows a more     sues to an unprecedented level. Spectroscopic target selection and
accurate estimate of n̄(z) for the LOWZE2 and LOWZE3 samples             mask creation are key areas where systematic problems can be in-
(and therefore a better means of assigning redshifts to the random       troduced if care is not taken to fully understand both. In this paper
galaxy sample). Without this step, the average density in chunk2         we have presented the target selection for the three primary spec-
and chunks 3-6 would be poorly determined and could lead to erro-        troscopic galaxy catalogues within BOSS: LOWZ, CMASS and
neous reconstruction flows towards or away from those regions in         Sparse, and for variations on these used for some early data. Each
the final combined catalogues. As discussed in Sec. 6.4 and Ross et      sample has different sky coverage and expected redshift distribu-
al. (2015), there is a significant correlation between i-band seeing     tion.
and LOWZE3 target density which we remove using a systematic                   We have also presented the methods used to turn the target
weight given by Eq. (48); LOWZE2 and LOWZ samples require no             catalogue and redshift measurement data into galaxy and random
systematic weight corrections. We follow this same procedure with        catalogues, which enable clustering measurements to be quickly
some minor but important differences when combining CMASS                made, as well as methods to mitigate potential systematics. It may
and LOWZ catalogues. After full footprint data and random cat-           be that some analyses are best done without the corrections pro-
alogues are produced, we trim each catalogue back to its original        vided - for example, it may be cleaner for small-scale clustering
targeted region (i.e., LOWZE2 in chunk 2, LOWZE3 in chunks 3-            analyses not to apply the close-pair weights, but to correct in some
6, and LOWZ in chunks ⩾ 7) using the mutually exclusive masks            other manner.
discussed above.                                                               In addition to a number of improvements over the catalogue
      Our algorithm to generate the combined catalogue from the          creation method used for DR9, DR10 and DR11 samples we have
four different samples (CMASS, LOWZ, LOWZE2, LOWZE3) is                  described how we have created a single BOSS catalog, combining
as follows:                                                              CMASS and LOWZ samples. This allows us to include some extra
                                                                         galaxies, and maximise the effective volume covered by galaxies
   • Renormalize the CMASS galaxy systematic weights
                                                                         within BOSS. It also allows us to use a binning scheme in redshift
w̃systot,i ∝ wsystot,i such that
                   P                                                     different from those of CMASS and LOWZ, optimising our cos-
                       i w̃ systot,i (wcp,i + wnoz,i − 1)                mological measurements.
              1=         P                                . (54)
                             i (wcp,i + wnoz,i − 1)
                                                                               The resulting galaxy and random catalogues, the largest in the
                                                                         world, are hosted at http://www.sdss.org/dr12/ as well
This ensures that in the combined catalog, a CMASS target and a
                                                                         as supplemental catalogue and target information. In this final re-
LOWZ target on average have equal weight in each of the three dis-
                                                                         lease, we also provide copies of our source code, MKSAMPLE, to re-
tinct regions. The functional form chosen for wsee and wstar does
                                                                         produce the DR10, DR11, and DR12 catalogues. The reader should
not guarantee this normalisation. Fibre collision and redshift failure
                                                                         consult the source code directly to resolve any ambiguities in our
weights are left the same as in the original CMASS-only catalogue
                                                                         description here.
and the parameters for the systematic weights are identical to the
                                                                               Next generation spectroscopic experiments, such as eBOSS
ones in the CMASS-only catalogue (apart from the renormalisa-
                                                                         (Dawson et al. 2015), DESI (Levi et al. 2013), HETDEX (Hill et
tion).
                                                                         al. 2008), 4MOST (de Jong et al. 2014), WEAVE (Dalton et al.
   • For each of LOWZ, LOWZE2, LOWZE3 samples
                                                                         2014) PFS (Takada et al. 2014), Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011) and
(“LOWZX”), read in the targets (including those in chunks
                                                                         WFIRST (Spergel et al. 2015), are expected to make cosmologi-
⩾ 7), and remove objects already in the CMASS catalog. Dupli-
                                                                         cal measurements with precision either comparable or higher by up
cate targets are 2.6%, 2.4%, and 4.4% of the LOWZ, LOWZE2,
                                                                         to an order of magnitude compared to that of BOSS, requiring a
and LOWZE3 samples, respectively. Fibre collision and redshift
                                                                         thorough understanding and extremely careful treatment of poten-
failure weights are then recomputed on each duplicate excluded
                                                                         tial systematic effects. Although each of these future experiments
LOWZX sample. As in the previous catalogues, fibre collision
                                                                         have different observing strategies, they will encounter challenges
and redshift failure weights are only assigned to other LOWZX
                                                                         in the process of catalogue creation similar to those of BOSS (e.g.
targets (not CMASS targets). For the LOWZE3 sample, sys-
                                                                         variations in the galaxy surface density due to galactic extinction is
tematic weights are assigned using the same parameters as the
                                                                         an effect inherent to our observable Universe). The lessons learned
LOWZE3-only sample, but renormalised as in Eq. 54.
                                                                         from the catalogue creation method applied within BOSS, and de-
   • Concatenate the CMASS and LOWZX samples and compute
                                                                         scribed in this paper, will be of strong benefit for these future sur-
the completeness of the combined sample in each sector. The rest of
                                                                         veys.
the catalogue creation steps, i.e., random catalogue generation and
n̄ estimation, are identical to the algorithms used for the CMASS
and LOWZ catalogues described previously.
                                                                         9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     When analysing the combined catalogue, as well as allowing
for any evolution in the bias across the sample, one also has to con-    Funding for SDSS-III has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan
sider the differential bias between LOWZ and CMASS samples.              Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Science

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
20      Reid et al.
Foundation, and the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science.             Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy V, 91470M (July 24,
The SDSS-III web site is http://www.sdss3.org/.                              2014); doi:10.1117/12.2055826
      SDSS-III is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consor-         Doi M., et al., 2010, AJ, 139, 1628
tium for the Participating Institutions of the SDSS-III Collabora-      Doroshkevich A.G., Zel’dovich Ya.B., Sunyaev R.A., 1978 Soviet
tion including the University of Arizona, the Brazilian Participation        Astronomy, 22, 523
Group, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon Univer-          Drinkwater M., et al., 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1429
sity, University of Florida, the French Participation Group, the Ger-   Eisenstein D.J., et al., 2001, AJ, 122, 2267
man Participation Group, Harvard University, the Instituto de As-       Eisenstein D.J., et al., 2005, ApJ, 633, 560
trofisica de Canarias, the Michigan State/Notre Dame/JINA Par-          Eisenstein D.J., et al., 2011, AJ, 142, 72
ticipation Group, Johns Hopkins University, Lawrence Berkeley           Feldman H.A., Kaiser N., Peacock J.A., 1994, ApJ, 426, 23
National Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Max         Fukugita M., et al., 1996, AJ, 111, 1748
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, New Mexico State         Gil-Marin H., et al., 2014, [arXiv:1407.5668]
University, New York University, Ohio State University, Pennsyl-        Gil-Marin H., et al., 2014, [arXiv:1408.0027]
vania State University, University of Portsmouth, Princeton Uni-        Górski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., Wandelt, B. D., Hansen, F.
versity, the Spanish Participation Group, University of Tokyo, Uni-          K., Reinecke, M., & Bartelmann, M. 2005, ApJ, 622, 759
versity of Utah, Vanderbilt University, University of Virginia, Uni-    Gunn J.E., et al., 1998, AJ, 116, 3040
versity of Washington, and Yale University.                             Gunn J.E., et al., 2006, AJ, 131, 2332
      We thank Eli Rykoff for providing the Bright Objects Mask         Hambly N.C., et al., 2008, MNRAS, 384, 637
described in Section 5.1.1.                                             Hewett P.C., Warren S.J., Leggett S.K., Hodgkin S.T., 2006, MN-
      The author order reflects the following: BR led the develop-           RAS, 367, 454
ment of the MKSAMPLE software package. She is followed in the           Hill G.J., et al., 2008, in Panoramic Views of the Universe, ASP
author list by two alphabetical lists of scientists who provided ma-         Conf. Series 399, 115
jor contributions to galaxy targeting and/or catalogue creation. Out    Høg, E., et al., 2000, A&A, 355, 27
of these, WJP is corresponding author as he took-over the creation      Hoshino H., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 998
of this paper when BR left the field of astronomy. This list is fol-    Kaiser N., 1986, MNRAS, 219, 785
lowed by an alphabetical list of scientists who provided moderate       Kaiser N., 1987, MNRAS, 227, 1
contributions to these topics, and who contributed to the BOSS          Laureijs R., et al., 2011, arXiv:1110.3193
project as a whole.                                                     Lawrence A., et al., 2007, MNRAS, 379, 1599
                                                                        Leauthaud A., et al., 2015, arXiv:1507.04752
                                                                        Levi M., et al., 2013, arXiv:1308.0847
                                                                        Lewis I.J., Glazebrook K., Taylor K., 1998, SPIE, 3355, 828
REFERENCES
                                                                        Lupton R., Gunn J.E., Ivezić Z., Knapp G., Kent S., 2001, “Astro-
Abazajian K. N., et al. 2004, AJ, 128, 502                                   nomical Data Analysis Software and Systems X”, v.238, 269.
Abazajian, K. N., et al., 2009, ApJS, 182, 543                          Maraston C., Strömbäck G., Thomas D., Wake D. A., Nichol R. C.,
Ahn C.P., et al., 2012, ApJS, 203, 21                                        2009, MNRAS, 394, 107
Ahn C.P., et al., 2014, ApJS, 211, 17                                   Maraston C., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 2764
Aihara H., et al., 2011, ApJS, 193, 29                                  Masters K.L., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1055
Alam S., et al., 2015, ApJS in press, arXiv:1501.00963                  Montero-Dorta A.D., et al., 2015, arXiv:1410.5854
Anderson L., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 427, 3435                             Nuza S.E., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 743
Anderson L., et al., 2014a, MNRAS, 439, 83                              Padmanabhan N., et al., 2008, ApJ, 674, 1217
Anderson L., et al., 2014b, MNRAS, 441, 24                              Parejko J.K., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 98
Annis J., et al., 2014, ApJ, 794, 120                                   Peebles P.J.E., Yu J.T., 1970, ApJ, 162, 815
Aubourg E., et al., 2014, [arXiv:1411.1074]                             Percival W.J., et al., 2001, MNRAS, 327, 1297
Blake C., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1707                                Percival W., Verde L., Peacock J., 2004, MNRAS, 347, 645
Blanton M., et al., 2003, AJ, 125, 2276                                 Pier J.R., et al., 2003, AJ, 125, 1559
Bolton A., et al., 2012, AJ, 144, 144                                   Reid B., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 426, 2719
Beutler F., et al., 2014a, MNRAS, 443, 1065                             Reid B., Seo H.-J., Leauthaud A., Tinker J., White M., 2014, MN-
Beutler F., et al., 2014b, MNRAS, 444, 3501                                  RAS, 444, 476
Bundy K., et al., 2015, arXiv:1509.01276                                Ross A., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 428, 1116
Casali M., et al., 2007, A&A, 467, 777                                  Ross A., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 424, 564
Cannon, R., et al., 2006, MNRAS, 372, 425                               Ross A., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 437, 1109
Chen Y.M., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 314                                Ross A., et al., 2015, in prep.
Chuang C.-H., 2013, [arXiv:1312.4889]                                   Rykoff E.S., et al., 2014, ApJ, 785, 104
Cole S., et al., 2005, MNRAS, 362, 505                                  Saito S., et al., 2015, arXiv:1509.00482
Colless M., et al., 2001, MNRAS, 328, 1039                              Samushia L., Pericval W., Raccanelli A., 2012, MNRAS, 420, 2102
Colless M., et al., 2003, [astro-ph/0306581]                            Samushia L., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 429, 1514
Dalton G., et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE 9147, Ground-based and Air-         Samushia L., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 439, 3504
     borne Instrumentation for Astronomy V, 91470L (July 8,             Sanchez et al., 2012, MNRAS, 425, 415
     2014); doi:10.1117/12.2055132;                                     Sanchez et al., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2692
Dawson K., et al., 2012, AJ, 145, 10                                    Schlegel D.J., Finkbeiner D.P., Davis M., 1998, ApJ, 500, 525
Dawson K., et al., 2015, in prep                                        Scoccola C.G., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 434, 1792
de Jong R.S., et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE 9147, Ground-based and           Seo H.-J., Eisenstein D. J., 2007, ApJ, 665, 14

                                                                                                             c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
                                                                                           BOSS LSS targeting and catalogues                   21
Smee S., et al., 2013, AJ, 146, 32
Smith J.A., et al., 2002, AJ, 123, 2121
                                                                                                     DR12 Early Chunks
Spergel D., et al., 2015, arXiv:1503.03757                                       +30°
Stoughton C., et al., 2002, AJ, 123, 3487




                                                                         Dec (degrees)
Strauss M.A., et al., 2002, AJ, 124, 1810
Sunyaev R.A., Zel’dovich Ya.B., 1970, ApSS, 7, 3                                 +20°
Swanson M.E.C., Tegmark M., Hamilton A.J.S., Hill J.C., 2008,
     MNRAS, 387, 1391                                                            +10°
                                                                                    0°
Takada M., et al., 2014, PASP, 66, 1
Tegmark M., et al., 2004, ApJ, 606, 702
Thomas D., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 431, 1383
Tojeiro R., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 424, 136
                                                                                  -10°
Tojeiro R., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2222
Vargas-Magana M., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 2                                        240° 220° 200°  180° 160° 140° 120°
                                                                                                RA (degrees)
Weinberg, D. H., et al., 2013, Physics reports, 530, 87
White M., et al., 2011, ApJ, 728, 126
                                                                          Figure A1. The location of early chunks, where targeting and/or photo-
York D.G., et al., 2000, AJ, 120, 1579                                    metric reduction versions differed from the later chunks. Chunk 2 (blue),
Zhao G.-B., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 2038                                chunks 3-4 (green), chunks 5-6 (red), and chunks 7-11 (black) are shown.
                                                                          Chunks 7-11 used an early version of the imaging data reduction software
                                                                          (see Section 2).


APPENDIX A: LOWZ EARLY SELECTION                                          nominal LOWZ target sample.
ALGORITHMS
                                                                                         rcmod       <        13.4 + c|| /0.3                (A6)
As the survey progressed, these were slight changes to the targeting                      |c⊥ |      <        0.2                            (A7)
pipeline. In some instances the newer algorithm was stricter than
the one used in the past, so we simply apply the same cuts to the ob-                       17    < rcmod <   19.5                           (A8)
jects targeted earlier as well. One special case is the LOWZ targets      rpsf − rcmod               >        0.3                            (A9)
in chunks 2-6. The star-galaxy separation algorithm for CMASS                ipsf − imod             >        0.2 + 0.2(20 − imod )         (A10)
was erroneously applied to those galaxies as well, resulting in a
                                                                            zpsf − zmod              >        9.125 − 0.46zmod .            (A11)
drastic reduction in the target density. There are other differences,
and so we define two algorithms, LOWZE2 as that applied to chunk            • The ifib2 < 21.5 CMASS cut was applied to chunks 15 and
2, and LOWZE3 as that applied to chunks 3-6. In analyses thus far         above. Our CMASS LSS catalogue applies this cut to all chunks.
we have simply eliminated these early regions from our LOWZ
catalog, but we are actively pursuing a sufficient description of that
population to robustly recover clustering measurements in those re-
gions. Removing this area results in a 10% reduction in the LOWZ
survey mask area. The distributions of the early chunks on the sky
are shown in Fig. A1. Chunk 2 was commissioning data, and used
the LOWZE2 version; Chunks 3-6 used LOWZE3, and chunks 7-
11 used older photometric reductions, and a different version of
RESOLVE (see Section 2.1). Chunk 1 was used for very early com-
missioning runs and is not of sufficient uniformity to be used to
create LSS catalogues. Chunk 1 is located at DEC=0◦ in the SGC
footprint (commonly referred to as “Stripe 82”). This area was later
reobserved with updated target selection as Chunk 11.

   • Chunk 2: The LOWZE2 sample had slightly different rcmod
cuts and the CMASS i-band star-galaxy separation cut was erro-
neously applied. The catalogue was later trimmed to 16 < rcmod
as well. This selection yields a target density ∼ 15% lower than the
nominal LOWZ target sample.
       rcmod      <     13.4 + c|| /0.3                          (A1)
         |c⊥ |    <     0.2                                      (A2)
    rcmod <      19.5                                            (A3)
rpsf − rcmod      >     0.3                                      (A4)
 ipsf − imod      >     0.2 + 0.2(20 − imod ) .                  (A5)
  • Chunks 3-6: The LOWZE3 sample is the same as chunk 2 but
with a stricter 17 < rcmod bound and both star-galaxy separation
cuts. This selection yields a target density ∼ 45% lower than the

c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 2–21
