                                               Prepared for submission to JCAP




                                               The Construction of Large-scale
                                               Structure Catalogs for the Dark
                                               Energy Spectroscopic Instrument
                                               A. J. Ross ,1 J. Aguilar,2 S. Ahlen ,3 S. Alam ,4 A. Anand ,2




arXiv:2405.16593v2 [astro-ph.CO] 18 Jul 2024
                                               S. Bailey ,2 D. Bianchi ,5 S. Brieden ,6 D. Brooks,7 E. Burtin,8
                                               A. Carnero Rosell ,9,10 E. Chaussidon ,2 T. Claybaugh,2
                                               S. Cole ,11 K. Dawson,12 A. de la Macorra ,13 A. de Mattia ,8
                                               Arjun Dey ,14 Biprateep Dey ,15 P. Doel,7 K. Fanning ,16,17
                                               S. Ferraro ,2,18 J. Ereza ,19 A. Font-Ribera ,7,20
                                               J. E. Forero-Romero ,21,22 E. Gaztañaga,23,24,25
                                               H. Gil-Marı́n ,26,23,27 S. Gontcho A Gontcho ,2
                                               A. X. Gonzalez-Morales ,28,29 J. Guy ,2 C. Hahn ,30
                                               S. Heydenreich,31 K. Honscheid,1,32,33 C. Howlett ,34 M. Ishak ,35
                                               T. Karim ,36,37 D. Kirkby ,38 T. Kisner ,2 H. Kong,20,33
                                               A. Kremin ,2 A. Krolewski,39,40,41 A. Lambert,2 M. Landriau ,2
                                               J. Lasker ,42 L. Le Guillou ,43 M. E. Levi ,2 M. Manera ,44,20
                                               P. Martini ,1,45,33 P. McDonald ,2 A. Meisner ,14 R. Miquel,46,20
                                               J. Moon,47 J. Moustakas ,48 A. Muñoz-Gutiérrez,13 A. D. Myers,49
                                               S. Nadathur ,24 L. Napolitano ,49 J. A. Newman ,15 J. Nie ,50
                                               G. Niz ,29,51 N. Palanque-Delabrouille ,8,2 W. J. Percival ,39,40,41
                                               C. Poppett,2,52,18 F. Prada ,19 A. Raichoor ,2 C. Ravoux ,53,8,54
                                               M. Rezaie ,55 A. Rosado-Marin,56 G. Rossi,57 L. Samushia ,58,55,59
                                               E. Sanchez ,60 E. F. Schlafly ,61 D. Schlegel,2 H. Seo ,56
                                               A. Smith ,11 D. Sprayberry,14 G. Tarlé ,62 D. Valcin ,56
                                               M. Vargas-Magaña ,13 B. A. Weaver,14 Michael J. Wilson,11
                                               J. Yu ,63 P. Zarrouk ,43 C. Zhao ,64 R. Zhou ,2 H. Zou ,50
                                               1 Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 West

                                                Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
                                               2 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                                               3 Physics Dept., Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA
                                               4 Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400005, India
                                               5 Dipartimento di Fisica “Aldo Pontremoli”, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria

                                                16, I-20133 Milano, Italy
6 Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Blackford Hill, Ed-

 inburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
7 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London,

 WC1E 6BT, UK
8 IRFU, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
9 Departamento     de Astrofı́sica, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), E-38206, La Laguna,
 Tenerife, Spain
10 Instituto de Astrofı́sica de Canarias, C/ Vı́a Láctea, s/n, E-38205 La Laguna, Tenerife,

 Spain
11 Institute for Computational Cosmology, Department of Physics, Durham University, South

 Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
12 Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Utah, 115 South 1400 East, Salt

 Lake City, UT 84112, USA
13 Instituto de Fı́sica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cd. de México C.P. 04510,

 México
14 NSF NOIRLab, 950 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
15 Department of Physics & Astronomy and Pittsburgh Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and

   Cosmology Center (PITT PACC), University of Pittsburgh, 3941 O’Hara Street, Pitts-
   burgh, PA 15260, USA
16 Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Menlo Park,

   CA 94305, USA
17 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94305, USA
18 University of California, Berkeley, 110 Sproul Hall #5800 Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
19 Instituto de Astrofı́sica de Andalucı́a (CSIC), Glorieta de la Astronomı́a, s/n, E-18008

   Granada, Spain
20 Institut de Fı́sica d’Altes Energies (IFAE), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Tech-

   nology, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra Barcelona, Spain
21 Departamento de Fı́sica, Universidad de los Andes, Cra. 1 No. 18A-10, Edificio Ip, CP

   111711, Bogotá, Colombia
22 Observatorio Astronómico, Universidad de los Andes, Cra. 1 No. 18A-10, Edificio H, CP

   111711 Bogotá, Colombia
23 Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC), 08034 Barcelona, Spain
24 Institute of Cosmology and Gravitation, University of Portsmouth, Dennis Sciama Building,

   Portsmouth, PO1 3FX, UK
25 Institute of Space Sciences, ICE-CSIC, Campus UAB, Carrer de Can Magrans s/n, 08913

   Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
26 Departament de Fı́sica Quàntica i Astrofı́sica, Universitat de Barcelona, Martı́ i Franquès

   1, E08028 Barcelona, Spain
27 Institut de Ciències del Cosmos (ICCUB), Universitat de Barcelona (UB), c. Martı́ i

   Franquès, 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
28 Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a, Av. Insurgentes Sur 1582. Colonia Crédito

   Constructor, Del. Benito Juárez C.P. 03940, México D.F. México
29 Departamento de Fı́sica, Universidad de Guanajuato - DCI, C.P. 37150, Leon, Guanajuato,

   México
30 Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA
31 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, UCO/Lick Observatory, University of Cali-

 fornia, 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
32 Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 West Woodruff Avenue, Columbus,

 OH 43210, USA
33 The Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210 OH, USA
34 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, 4072, Australia
35 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
36 Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138,

 USA
37 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H4,

 Canada
38 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, 92697, USA
39 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W,

 Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
40 Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, 31 Caroline St. North, Waterloo, ON N2L 2Y5,

 Canada
41 Waterloo Centre for Astrophysics, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo,

 ON N2L 3G1, Canada
42 Department of Physics, Southern Methodist University, 3215 Daniel Avenue, Dallas, TX

 75275, USA
43 Sorbonne Université, CNRS/IN2P3, Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et de Hautes En-

 ergies (LPNHE), FR-75005 Paris, France
44 Departament de Fı́sica, Serra Húnter, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra

 (Barcelona), Spain
45 Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 4055 McPherson Laboratory, 140

 W 18th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
46 Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Passeig de Lluı́s Companys, 23, 08010

 Barcelona, Spain
47 Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Gießenbachstraße 1, 85748 Garching,

 Germany
48 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Siena College, 515 Loudon Road, Loudonville, NY

 12211, USA
49 Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Wyoming, 1000 E. University, Dept. 3905,

 Laramie, WY 82071, USA
50 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, A20 Datun Rd., Chaoyang

 District, Beijing, 100012, P.R. China
51 Instituto Avanzado de Cosmologı́a A. C., San Marcos 11 - Atenas 202. Magdalena Contr-

 eras, 10720. Ciudad de México, México
52 Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, 7 Gauss Way, Berkeley, CA

 94720, USA
53 Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS/IN2P3, CPPM, Marseille, France
54 Université Clermont-Auvergne, CNRS, LPCA, 63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
55 Department of Physics, Kansas State University, 116 Cardwell Hall, Manhattan, KS 66506,

 USA
56 Department of Physics & Astronomy, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA
57 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sejong University, Seoul, 143-747, Korea
58 Abastumani Astrophysical Observatory, Tbilisi, GE-0179, Georgia
59 Faculty of Natural Sciences and Medicine, Ilia State University, 0194 Tbilisi, Georgia
60 CIEMAT, Avenida Complutense 40, E-28040 Madrid, Spain
61 Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
62 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
63 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
64 Department of Astronomy, Tsinghua University, 30 Shuangqing Road, Haidian District,

 Beijing, China, 100190


Abstract. We present the technical details on how large-scale structure (LSS) catalogs are
constructed from redshifts measured from spectra observed by the Dark Energy Spectro-
scopic Instrument (DESI). The LSS catalogs provide the information needed to determine
the relative number density of DESI tracers as a function of redshift and celestial coordinates
and, e.g., determine clustering statistics. We produce catalogs that are weighted subsamples
of the observed data, each matched to a weighted ‘random’ catalog that forms an unclustered
sampling of the probability density that DESI could have observed those data at each loca-
tion. Precise knowledge of the DESI observing history and associated hardware performance
allows for a determination of the DESI footprint and the number of times DESI has covered
it at sub-arcsecond level precision. This enables the completeness of any DESI sample to be
modeled at this same resolution. The pipeline developed to create LSS catalogs has been
designed to easily allow robustness tests and enable future improvements. We describe how
it allows ongoing work improving the match between galaxy and random catalogs, such as in-
cluding further information when assigning redshifts to randoms, accounting for fluctuations
in target density, accounting for variation in the redshift success rate, and accommodating
blinding schemes.
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                           1

2 The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument                                               3
  2.1 Focal Plane Geometry                                                               3
  2.2 Survey Strategy                                                                    5

3 Gathering and Processing Inputs                                                        6
  3.1 Collecting Reachable Targets                                                       7
  3.2 Collecting Spectroscopic Information                                               8
  3.3 Counting Target Appearances                                                       10

4 Target Catalogs in DESI Footprint                                                     10
  4.1 Full Catalogs, Without Vetos                                                      11
  4.2 Applying Vetos                                                                    14
  4.3 Assignment Completeness Definitions                                               17

5 Modelling Selection Function Variations                                               18
  5.1 Assignment Completeness                                                           18
  5.2 Density Variations due to Imaging                                                 19
  5.3 Redshift Failures                                                                 20

6 Enabling Null Tests and Density Determination                                         21

7 Clustering Catalogs                                                                   22
  7.1 Reducing Data to what is used for Clustering                                      22
  7.2 Adding Radial Information to Randoms                                              23
  7.3 Weighting to Optimally Balance Sampling Rate                                      23
  7.4 Producing Subsamples                                                              24

8 Summary                                                                               24

9 Data Availability                                                                     26

A Glossary                                                                              27


1   Introduction

The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI; [1]) was designed to construct three-
dimensional maps of the structure of the Universe. It does so by measuring the spectra
of pre-selected galaxy and quasar ‘targets’, from which redshifts can be measured. Given
a cosmological model, the angular celestial coordinates and redshifts can be transformed to
comoving Cartesian coordinates. The resulting distribution (or, more commonly, its summary
statistics) can be compared to that predicted by the cosmological model. In this manner,
cosmological constraints obtained with DESI, and the results from Data Release 1 (DR1;[2])
are presented in [3–8].




                                           –1–
      Properly interpreting the structure traced by the celestial coordinates and redshifts
requires additional context: The relative likelihood as a function of target properties, celestial
coordinates, and redshift that our instrument could have successfully measured a redshift.
This is commonly referred to as the ‘selection function’ and it is typically not isotropic
and has a complicated redshift dependence. To account for this, we produce ‘Large-Scale
structure (LSS) catalogs’, which pair the observed data with ‘randoms’ that Poisson sample
the observed space. The match between the galaxy and random catalogs is achieved by
applying weights to the data and randoms and also sub-sampling the randoms, thereby
accounting for effects such as the survey footprint, completeness variations due to the number
of times DESI has covered the footprint, instrument performance, and systematic variation
due to observing conditions.
      DESI builds on the tradition of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) LSS catalogs,
which are summarized in [9]. Early versions of the DESI LSS catalog pipeline were applied
to ‘Survey Validation’ (SV) data [10] from the DESI early data release (EDR [11]) and an
early processing of the data from the first two months of the main survey observing [12]. In
this work, we provide a technical description of the DESI LSS pipeline, as applied to DESI
data release one (DR1; [2]). The process and driving philosophy are meant to be constant
throughout DESI data releases. However, specifics are likely to change as methods improve.
The data model is expected to change slightly to reflect this and will be updated with each
data release1 . We focus on the structure of the pipeline and discuss how it is built with
flexibility in mind so that improved algorithms can be used in the future. In many cases, we
will reference the specific choices adopted in DR1, but this is meant only to provide concrete
examples. The motivation and validation of the specific choices for DR1 are given in [13] and
its companion papers.
      The aspect that is least likely to change is how we track the angular celestial coordinates
where DESI observations were possible. We thus begin this work in Section 2 by discussing
the DESI instrument, with a focus on the focal plane geometry, as mapped onto celestial
coordinates, and the strategy with which observations are combined to cover the sky. We
then detail the steps of the LSS catalog pipeline:
• In Section 3, we describe the initial steps to gather all of the information on potentially
assigned targets, observed spectra, and randoms associated with each DESI observation. We
describe how it is combined, with each target appearing potentially many times, once for
every combination of telescope pointing and hardware configuration that it was observable.
We then describe how this information is used to track the DESI footprint and the number
of times it was covered, to sub-arcsecond precision.
• Then, in Section 4, we explain how the combined information gathered in the previous
section is condensed into ‘full’ catalogs containing all unique entries per target and random
that were reachable to a DESI fiber positioner, how veto masks can be applied to these full
catalogs to restrict them to areas within which the selection function can be modelled, and
the completeness statistics we determine for each target included in these catalogs.
• Next, in Section 5, we describe how the selection function details such as completeness
variations, imaging systematics in the target samples, and variation in the redshift success
rate can be modelled, using the full catalogs. We then, in Section 6, briefly discuss how the
resulting catalogs allow for null tests of the selection function modelling and how catalog-level
blinding can be applied.
  1
    The data model is here: https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_ROOT/vac/RELEASE/
lss/index.html




                                              –2–
• The final pieces of the LSS pipeline are described in Section 7, where we describe the
production of the ‘clustering’ catalogs that are meant to be input to DESI clustering mea-
surement pipelines. This includes cutting the data to secure redshifts within a desired range,
assigning redshifts to the random catalogs, and calculating weights meant to optimally ac-
count for changes in the observed density, e.g., as a function of redshift and the number of
overlapping tiles.
We provide a summary and concluding remarks in Section 8.
      The clustering catalog products are meant to enable the simple calculation of clustering
statistics. The detailed information on the pipeline process presented in this work and its
various assumptions allows biases in the resulting clustering statistics to be predicted and
modeled. However, the details of such modeling are presented elsewhere. The specific choices
regarding the pipeline applied to the DR1 data and the resulting 2-point clustering measure-
ments2 are presented in [13]. The ability to extract unbiased cosmological information from
DESI LSS catalogs obtained from realistic simulations is the subject of many DESI DR1
studies, including [14–16].
      For convenience, a glossary defining relevant DESI terms, including those defined during
the LSS pipeline process, is presented in an appendix.

2       The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument

The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI [17]) is installed on the Nicholas U. Mayall
Telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona. It collects spectra using 5,020
robotically controlled fiber positioners [18] to move the same number of optical fibers onto
pre-determined ‘target’ objects on the sky [19]. The light from 5,000 fibers3 is divided into
10 equal-sized wedge-shaped regions known as ‘petals’. The light from the 500 fibers on
each petal is carried to its own climate-controlled spectrograph (and thus there are 10 DESI
spectrographs). Within each spectrograph, the light is split into three wavelength bands, B
(3600-5800 Å), R (5760-7620 Å), and Z (7520-9824 Å), each readout with one CCD detector.

2.1      Focal Plane Geometry
The DESI focal plane subtends a radius of 1.6 degrees on the sky. However, within this area,
there are many regions where no fibers can be placed. Fig. 1 shows the sky coordinates
of assigned targets for one DESI ‘tile’. Each tile represents a specific pointing in celestial
coordinates, with an associated set of targets assigned to fiber positioners. One can observe
each of the ten petals, with a gap between each where no targets are assigned. There is a
hole in the center of the focal plane where no positioners can reach. Finally, on each petal,
there is a rectangular area missing at one edge of the outer radius. At this location on each,
there is a ‘guide and focus array’ camera, which observes stars to, as the name implies, keep
the telescope on target and in focus.
     The pattern seen in the left-hand panel of Fig. 1 represents a fundamental building block
of the geometry the DESI survey covers. However, the focal plane can be further divided into
many sections based on the relevant hardware components. Individual components can fail
but leave most of the instrument operational, with the effect simply being a small hole that
needs to be masked in the LSS analysis. The greatest such region is a petal, while the smallest
    2
     This includes various window functions required to translate between true and observed redshift-space
clustering measurements.
   3
     The light from a fixed set 20 of the fibers is sent to a camera that monitors the sky brightness [17]




                                                  –3–
Figure 1. The left-hand plot displays the positions on the sky of each of the 5,000 fiber positioners
that collect light to be sent to the spectrographs for DESI TILEID 1000. The 4,201 locations displayed
in black were assigned to positioners that were enabled to be assigned science targets. The 799 in red
were not and such areas for this tile are later masked from the LSS analysis. The right-hand panel
displays the same positions, but for only one petal and colors show the FIBERID. The 500 FIBERID
per petal have their light output sequentially across CCD detectors.


is a single fiber positioner. The operational status of each fiber positioner can change even
between exposures taken on any given night. However, the positioner hardware database
reflecting their status is updated at most daily. The assignments for a given night use
this database to determine which positioners can potentially be assigned to science targets.
The red points on the left-hand panel of Fig. 1 show fiber positioners that were flagged
as not assignable to science targets on the night the tile was first observed, due to failures
during calibration tests or other known hardware failures4 . The contiguous blocks in the
upper-left-hand petal were non-operational due to communication issues in the controller
electronics, which were later fixed. Given the (at most) daily updates of the positioner
hardware database5 , positioners can only be lost during a night. However, the status of each
positioner is determined and recorded in the metadata for every exposure, which allows any
failures to be masked from the analysis in post-processing.
     The light from the fibers is read out with a greater FIBERID number corresponding to
a greater number in the CCD column [21], thus, any issues with the CCDs are likely to
remove a block of data that is contiguous in fiber number. Each FIBERID corresponds to a
particular area on the focal plane, which is shown in the right-hand panel of Fig. 1. One can
observe a checker-board pattern, which serves to de-correlate the position on the CCD with
the focal plane radius. A failure of only one of the B, R, Z cameras will cause all of the data
to be masked from LSS analysis; we require full wavelength coverage for ‘good hardware’.
A common issue that DESI has faced is failures of particular amplifiers of the CCDs. Each

  4
      When possible, these are used to obtain sky spectra.
  5
      See section 5.13 of [20] for more details.




                                                    –4–
amplifier6 is associated with half of the spectra on the CCD and thus when one fails, we
mask half of the fibers on the petal (1 through 250 or 251 through 500).
      The combination of potential hardware effects described above means that the precise
geometry of any two DESI tiles is unlikely to match. The angular patterns in any particular
tile footprint should, however, look similar to those seen in Fig. 1.

2.2    Survey Strategy
DESI survey operations are described in detail in [20]. Here, we detail how key aspects
impact the creation of LSS catalogs. DESI dynamically divides its observing time into
separate ‘bright’ time and ‘dark’ time programs, depending on observing conditions, with
different target classes observed in each. DESI obtains targets for spectroscopic observations
based on existing photometry [19]. The different classes of targets are treated separately in
dark and bright time. Thus any target can be observed in both dark and bright time7 ; one
such observation will not influence the other. For extra-Galactic targets, observations of the
Bright Galaxy Sample [22] happen in bright time. The Luminous Red Galaxies (LRGs [23]),
quasars (QSO [24]), and Emission Line Galaxies (ELGs [25]) are observed in dark time.
      Observed data from every night are processed by the DESI spectroscopic pipeline [21]
each morning following observations for immediate quality checks. The results are referred
to as the ‘daily’ products. Tiles that have been observed with a cumulative effective ob-
serving time that is at least 85% of the target threshold are considered for approval, via a
quality assurance (QA) program that inspects, e.g., the redshift success rates, dN/dz, and
the residuals of sky fibers following sky subtraction8 .
      The information on the targets observed on the accepted tiles is fed back into the
‘merged target ledger’ (MTL), which contains all of the details on DESI targets necessary
to pass them to fiber assignment. The MTL contains a ledger that details the observing
history of all targets, including the initial unobserved state for all. Separate ledgers exist
for dark and bright times. The targets that were observed with properly working hardware
have their state updated. For galaxies and quasars with redshifts < 2.1, this means their
priorities are reduced such that they will only be observed again if no other science targets
are available to a given fiber positioner. Quasars with z > 2.1 instead get up to a total of
four observations, until their priorities are similarly reduced. This is to increase the signal-to-
noise of the Lyman-α forest absorption features in the spectra. Targets that were attempted
to be observed with poorly performing (‘bad’) hardware are instead masked from updates,
i.e., they are treated as if the observation did not happen. The flags used to mask bad
hardware are detailed in section 6.3.1 of [20] and are the same as we describe in Section 3.2,
which ultimately allows us to apply the same mask to data and randoms, at a resolution of
individual fiber positioners.
      To observe all DESI target classes to a high completeness and without significant holes,
each area on the sky is covered by multiple tiles. The expected distribution for the number of
overlapping tiles for completed dark and bright time surveys is shown in figure 2 of [20], and
on average it is greater than 5 for dark time and 3 for bright time. This assumes 7 passes of
non-overlapping tiles in dark time and 4 in bright time. Additional passes can be added, e.g.,
   6
     Readout of the DESI CCDs is possible in both two and four amplifier modes, but one faulty amplifier will
always affect a full half of the spectra on the CCD.
   7
     Though, this would mean it satisfied the target selection cuts of both a bright time and a dark time
sample.
   8
     Section 5.10 of [20] has further details.




                                                   –5–
if observations are more efficient than originally predicted and extra time is available. DESI
prioritizes the completion of observations at a given area on the sky, as opposed to covering
the full footprint. However, based on the MTL process described above, any observed tile
cannot have overlapping observations until it has passed QA. The QA process was still being
fully defined during the first two months of DESI main survey operations. Thus, the data
from this period, used for the first large-scale clustering studies presented in [12], consists
primarily of non-overlapping tiles. The resulting DR1 coverage is thus a mix of area covered
with a large and small number of overlapping tiles, see [13].


3   Gathering and Processing Inputs

DESI targets are selected based on photometry from Data Release 9 of Legacy Survey [26,
27] imaging [19]. DESI LSS catalogs are divided into separate tracer catalogs based on
their designation at the time of targeting, as defined by desitarget [19]. This means, for
example, that an LRG target determined to be a star-forming galaxy based on its spectrum
will always remain an LRG in the LSS catalogs. Observations that do not yield secure
redshifts or are outside of the desired redshift range are eventually discarded, but not until the
production of the ‘clustering’ catalogs described in Section 7. After defining samples based
on their targeting, sub-samples can be defined based on any combination of photometric
and spectroscopic properties. This will be discussed in Section 7.4. Throughout, we will
refer to a ‘target’ as an object that has been selected for spectroscopic follow-up but has
not necessarily been observed. A qualifier will always specify its state, where relevant (e.g.,
‘observed’, ‘reachable’).
      For the data, the process described in the following subsections is repeated for each of
the tracer types. We first select all of the DESI targets for a given type and include only a
sub-selection of the columns relevant to LSS analysis. We save the files to disk with a root
naming scheme that is based on the targetmask function in desitarget (see [19] for more
details) and will be shared by the rest of the catalog products. For the DR1 analysis, five
samples are produced: LRG, ELG LOPnotqso, QSO, BGS ANY, and BGS BRIGHT. The LRG and
QSO samples are selected purely based on their DESI TARGET bit value and passing their name
to the targetmask function. For the ELG LOPnotqso sample, targets satisfying the ELG LOP
DESI TARGET bit are kept and those also satisfying the QSO DESI TARGET bit are rejected
(these are considered only in the QSO catalogs). The BGS BRIGHT sample is produced by
selecting based on the BGS TARGET value (instead of DESI TARGET) and it is a subset of the
BGS ANY sample. Dark time targets (LRG, QSO, ELG) are compiled only for dark time tiles,
and bright time targets (BGS) for bright time tiles.
      The ELG naming convention can be explained as follows (see [19, 25] for the full details):
The ELG sample overall is split into a higher priority (designated ELG LOP) and lower priority
sample (designated ELG VLO), with the higher priority sample comprising 75% of the targets
and containing most that have z > 1.1. The designation ELG HIP is reserved for the 10%
of ELG targets (with no distinction between ELG LOP/VLO) that are randomly selected to
have the same assignment priority as LRG targets. The ELG targets are given this targeting
bit in addition to their original bit (i.e., selecting ELG LOP will always select the full original
ELG LOP sample defined via photometric cuts).
      Catalogs can be constructed for the full ELG(notqso). We have not done so for DR1 as
we have instead focused on the higher assignment priority (and thus more complete) samples.




                                              –6–
For simplicity, the ELG LOPnotqso sample is referred to simply as ‘ELG’ in all DR1 analyses.
Future analyses are likely to include the lower-priority ELG sample in cosmological analyses.
      We also use the randoms produced by desitarget [19]. These are random points
in celestial coordinates isotropically occupying the area covered by Legacy Survey [26, 27]
imaging. They are divided into files that each have a density of 2500/deg2 and a total of
200 are available. As of DR1, the DESI LSS pipeline uses 18 of them. The 2500/deg2 is
convenient, as it allows for quick determination of footprint area after various cuts. In the
following subsections, the randoms are processed separately only for dark and bright time;
separate processing for randoms based on the particular tracer type does not happen until
later steps.
      The details of the above discussion are independent of actual DESI observations. To
produce LSS catalogs, we require two fundamental pieces of information based on the DESI
observations:

      • 1) The area on the sky where we could have observed (i.e., the ‘footprint’), based on
        where the telescope was pointed and hardware specifications.

      • 2) Redshift determinations and associated metadata extracted from the observed spec-
        tra

The process of obtaining this information is described in the following subsections.

3.1     Collecting Reachable Targets
We use the DESI fiberassign [28] software9 to define the DESI footprint and collect the
information on all targets within it. The properties of all cases in which a DESI target is
reachable to a given fiber positioner are determined for every tile; each case represents a
‘potential assignment’. Collecting this information is required to determine completeness
statistics and correct for their variations properly. Each fiber positioner is expected to be
able to reach many DESI targets. All of these will be potential assignments, but only one will
receive the actual assignment, which is given to the target that has the highest PRIORITY
(and then SUBPRIORITY if multiple have the same PRIORITY). The potential assignments
information is recorded within the same file that designates the final (actual) fiber positioner
assignments10 .
      For a given set of tiles (e.g., those included in DR1), we concatenate the potential
assignments information for each of the target samples defined above. When doing so, we
match (via TARGETID) to the target information at the time of assignment (recorded in the
file header of the fiberassign file for each tile), as recorded in the MTL, thereby ensuring
we keep all relevant metadata. The information on all potential assignments on all tiles and
fiber positioners is kept, without any consideration of whether or when an actual assignment
occurred. Thus, each TARGETID is likely to appear multiple times; at least once for every tile
containing a fiber positioner that could reach it and potentially multiple times for each such
tile (given the patrol radii for fiber positioners overlap). The final result is the information,
for a given set of DESI tiles, on all of the cases for which targets of the given target sample
were reachable by a DESI fiber positioner; this will vastly outnumber the observed cases.
  9
    https://github.com/desihub/fiberassign
 10
    within the POTENTIAL_ASSIGNMENTS HDU, for the files described here:              https://
desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_TARGET/fiberassign/tiles/TILES_VERSION/TILEXX/
uncompressed-fiberassign-TILEID.html




                                             –7–
This thus forms a super-set of the targets within the observed DESI footprint, which we
write to disk and then use in subsequent steps. We denote these catalogs as the ‘combined
target information catalogs’11 .
      The fiberassign software can be run efficiently on random samples to obtain only their
potential assignments, using the specific hardware state and observing information as for the
data. The information required to reproduce the data assignment is stored for every tile and
verified based on automated software to exactly reproduce the original assignments12 before
DESI survey operations accepts the information observed on the tile. Running the potential
assignments software using the same settings but applying it to the random samples thus
finds all of the reachable randoms for the same set of tiles. At this stage, the randoms do not
need to be separated by tracer sample; the information will be the same for the same set of
tiles. Thus, the combined target information catalogs for each of the (18 for DR1) randoms
we process are saved in separate dark and bright time files (since dark and bright time use
different sets of tiles)13 .
      The potential assignment information for data and randoms can be gathered imme-
diately following any DESI observations. We therefore do so on a roughly bi-weekly basis
and thus keep up to date with the survey progress. This allows any particular issues to be
identified and solved before the data release spectroscopic processing and then allows a fast
turn-around on the production and validation of LSS catalog products after the data release
processing.
      A caveat to the above discussion is that the compiled information is a super-set of the
targets that were actually reachable. It does not incorporate regions that were excluded,
e.g., for being too close to the edge of a petal. These are referred to in the fiberassign
software as ‘collisions’. When obtaining the assignments for a tile, the fiberassign software
first determines all potential assignments, ignoring any collisions. The collisions are only
rejected when determining the actual assignments and the potential assignments recorded in
the fiberassign files thus include the collisions. To properly define the footprint, we thus
run a function from the fiberassign code, developed to address this issue, a posteriori to
reject the approximately 5% of targets and randoms that were not truly reachable. For the
data, these collisions are removed at the beginning of the steps to create the ‘full’ catalogs
described in Section 4. For the randoms, we record the collision information at the same time
as running the software that determines the potential assignments, as running these together
is more efficient than running them in separate steps.

3.2    Collecting Spectroscopic Information
We collect information from the spectroscopic reduction and redshift fitting pipeline both
from the ‘daily’ version and for the version associated with the data release. For DR1,
homogeneous processing applied to the full dataset is referred to as ‘Iron’. This includes
data taken from May 14, 2021 through to June 14, 2022. In the Iron release, the majority
of the spectroscopic information we use has already been concatenated across the observed
  11
     Their location in the data model is here: https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_
ROOT/vac/RELEASE/lss/VERSION/potential_assignments/data/index.html. The main update for DR1 is
that the data catalogs are split by tracer type instead of program.
  12
     This is non-trivial because different computing systems produce each version of the assignments and
passing requires that the hardware database is properly synced between the software environments.
  13
     Their location in the data model is here: https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_
ROOT/vac/RELEASE/lss/VERSION/potential_assignments/random/index.html.




                                                 –8–
tiles by the DESI spectroscopic pipeline team and released as the per-tile cumulative redshift
catalogs14 .
      The daily version of the spectroscopic pipeline is run as soon after data collection as
possible, typically the following morning. No official redshift catalog is produced by the
spectroscopic pipeline based on the daily data. Thus, for processing the daily spectroscopic
reductions through the LSS pipeline, we instead concatenate the information produced for
each observed tile, on the same roughly bi-weekly cadence as we obtain the combined target
information catalogs. This ultimately allows LSS catalogs to be produced that are up to date
with the survey progress.
      For both the daily and data release spectroscopic products, as part of the LSS catalog
process, we concatenate three additional classes of information across the given set of tiles:

      • The ‘zmtl’ files, from which the key piece of information for our purposes is whether the
        observation would have caused an update to the MTL ledger, based on the available
        information on the hardware performance. This information is later used to determine
        the data and randoms associated with ‘good’ hardware.

      • The files containing information on emission line flux. This information is later used
        to determine whether an ELG observation yields a good redshift.

      • QSO catalogs, per tile, the data that satisfies the criteria determining whether an
        observation results in a secure QSO is kept. This information is later used to determine
        whether a QSO observation yields a good redshift.

The concatenated ‘zmtl’ files are joined with the redshift catalog, matching based on TARGETID
and TILEID. Both the redshift and zmtl files have a column named ZWARN, but the zmtl files
contain extra bits that encode good hardware information. Thus, we convert the zmtl column
name to ZWARN MTL. This produces the ‘combined spectroscopic information catalog’.
      Information from the combined spectroscopic information catalog is joined to both the
data and random combined target information catalogs. We first cut the information to the
list of TILEID to be included for any data release. For the data, we then perform a left-
outer join15 so that all targets are kept, regardless of whether they were observed. The join
is performed by matching on TARGETID,FIBER,TILEID and thus properly matches observed
targets to their tile and fiber. For the randoms, we match only to the FIBER and TILEID; thus
a match should exist for all. For convenience, we combine the TILEID and LOCATION columns
to create a unique identifier TILELOCID for the observation (LOCATION is the positioner ID
and thus there is a one-to-one mapping between values of FIBER and LOCATION) via

                             TILELOCID = 10000TILEID + LOCATION.                            (3.1)

All data (including randoms) are given a TILELOCID, as we are only considering data that
was identified as a potential assignment and can thus be associated with a given DESI tile
and fiber. The TILELOCID allows all of the data (again, including randoms) to be linked to
the observational metadata, including the targets that were not observed.
 14
     https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_SPECTRO_REDUX/SPECPROD/zcatalog/
zall-tilecumulative-SPECPROD.html
  15
     Such a join will keep all of the rows of the table that is being matched to.




                                               –9–
     The resulting data and random catalogs are saved to disk16 and used as inputs for the
next step the LSS catalog pipeline, described in Section 4. We will refer to them as the
‘combined target and spectroscopic information catalogs’.

3.3       Counting Target Appearances
The catalogs described above are used to determine information on all of the times a target
appeared on a fiber that was observed with “good hardware”. For the good hardware defini-
tion, we use the same Hgd quantity defined in Section 4.2. We obtain the information on one
entry per TARGETID and determine three new quantities, which are recorded in the following
columns in the ‘full’ catalogs described in Section 4:
      • NTILE An integer denoting the number of tiles the target appeared on; we will denote
this Ntile in equations.
      • TILES A string listing the tiles that the target appeared on, using the TILEIDs sorted
in ascending order and separated by ‘-’. Each unique TILES represents a unique group of
overlapping tiles that we will use later to group the data and refer to as tgroup .
      • TILELOCIDS A string listing the TILELOCIDs separated by ’-’.
      The process described above provides the basic geometrical information on the area of
the sky that DESI has observed, for both data and randoms. The resolution is limited only
by the accuracy at which the DESI fiberassign software can properly predict a target will
be reachable by the DESI focal plane system. The mean difference between the predicted and
final focal position for successful observations in DR1 dark time is 0.04mm, which corresponds
to less than 1 arcsecond on the sky. The small-scale geometry of the DESI footprint is
illustrated in Fig. 2, where a small selection of the DR1 data is plotted for LRG targets and
randoms in the top panels. All targets that were reachable by good hardware are shown.
Within this region, the number of overlapping tiles varies between 1 and 7. In areas with
nTILE > 3, one can see that exact numbers vary on small scales but are the same for both
targets and randoms.
      In the bottom panels of Fig. 2, the coverage as of March 7th, 2024 is shown. These
results are obtained from the daily version of the LSS catalog pipeline. One can observe
that the coverage has improved substantially, with the entire area covered at least once
and most of it more than four times. Small pockets exist with only one tile coverage, and
the completeness will be lower in those areas. The displayed mapping will be used for the
completeness corrections. For LRG targets, one observes some areas that are still white,
which are simply areas with no LRG targets (at the resolution of the figure), given we are
plotting all targets that were reachable by good hardware.

4        Target Catalogs in DESI Footprint

In the previous section, we detailed how the information associated with each case in which a
target was reachable is gathered and stored in combined target and spectroscopic information
catalogs, typically resulting in many entries per TARGETID. The next step in the DESI LSS
pipeline is to produce the ‘full’ catalogs that contain entries for all reachable targets, whether
or not they were observed, but are cut to unique TARGETID. These catalogs are produced per
supported tracer type (described in 3). We describe the process of creating these catalogs
    16
    In the data model here https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_ROOT/vac/RELEASE/
lss/VERSION/inputs_wspec/index.html. The main update for DR1 is that the data catalogs are divided by
tracer type instead of program.




                                               – 10 –
Figure 2. Maps of the number of overlapping tiles, nTILE in a small selection of the DESI area:
The top panels show results within the DR1 (May 14, 2021 through to June 14, 2022) footprint and
the bottom panels show the results as of March 7th, 2024. The left-hand panels show nTILE at the
location of potential LRG assignments. The right-hand panel shows the same information assigned
to the random sample. One can observe they trace the same small-scale structure.


and the stages they go through in this section. Weights to account for fluctuations in the
selection function are eventually added to these catalogs but will described in Section 5.


4.1   Full Catalogs, Without Vetos

The ‘full noveto’ catalogs are constructed starting from the joined combined target and
spectroscopic information catalogs (which have already been divided by target type). We
wish to cut to unique TARGETID. We cannot do so randomly, as, e.g., we must keep the cases
that have been observed. Similar to SV ([11]; but with some important details different),
we define three Boolean quantities that each depend on the particular tile and fiber. Many
targets will be potential assignments for the same tile and fiber (with only one possibly
observed). Thus, the designated quantities are likely to be shared by many targets. They
are:




                                            – 11 –
      • Hgd : The particular fiber on the given tile was observed with good hardware. Val-
ues with false will later be used as a veto. We provide further details on how each Hgd
determination is made in Section 4.2 (the subscript gd is short for ‘good’).
      • Tfa : The particular combination of fiber and tile (but not necessarily target) was
assigned and observed; i.e., for the LRG sample, this quantity will be True if any LRG was
assigned and observed on the given fiber and tile, but, given that we have already cut to
LRG targets at this point, it will be False if any other type of target was assigned to the
particular combination of fiber and tile (the subscript fa stands for ‘fiber assigned’).
      • Pgd : The PRIORITY of the target that was assigned at the given tile and fiber was
less than or equal to the maximum PRIORITY allowed for the given target class. We describe
how these values are set for DR1 in the text that follows. This will later be used as a veto,
and further details of its definition are given in Section 4.2.
A fourth quantity is defined that depends on the particular target (in addition to the fiber
and tile):
     • Lfa : The particular target, fiber, and tile was assigned and observed.
     These quantities are combined to create a value to sort by

                          vsort = Lfa Hgd Pgd Qpri + Tfa Hgd Pgd + Hgd + Pgd ,                            (4.1)

where Qpri is 1 for all tracers except for QSO and for QSO it is the priority value; this
prioritizes the first observations of QSO.17 We sort by this vsort in ascending order and then
cut to unique targets by selecting the last entry for each unique TARGETID.
     The purpose of the sort is to

       • ensure that targets observed with good hardware are kept,

       • ensure that targets with TILELOCID shared by an observed target of the same type are
         kept ahead of those that are not,

       • and ensure that any entries not in a veto mask are prioritized relative to those that
         are.

This maximizes both the number of observed targets and the number of targets associated
with an observation of the given type; this ultimately maximizes the ftile completeness defined
in Section 4.3 and Eq. 4.3. Table 1 shows values of the above boolean columns for a particular
LRG target that was reachable on multiple tiles. The vsort is greatest for the case in which
the target was actually observed, ensuring that is the entry kept. The next greatest vsort
value (3) is for the case where the TILELOCID is the same as for a separate LRG target that
was observed. We note that, as of DR1, it is possible for, e.g., the maximum vsort value of
a target to be 3 and for that value to occur at multiple TILELOCID. In such a situation, the
TILELOCID kept will depend on the ordering before the sort.
     Before the sort, we obtain the footprint coverage information described in Section 3.3.
For DR1, we do this simultaneously, to ensure full consistency in the Hgd definition used.
The coverage information is determined per target. Thus, after the data described above
has been cut to unique targets, it is matched via TARGETID to the coverage information. In
this way, in addition to providing the information on the number of overlapping tiles for
  17
     The first QSO observation is used to determine whether it will get three more observations at high
PRIORITY and thus only the first observation provides a fair test for determining redshift success rates (as the
likelihood of success on a subsequent observation is conditioned on the success of the first observation).




                                                    – 12 –
Table 1. Example values that contribute to how the data on reachable targets is sorted before
cutting to unique TARGETID, for a particular LRG target. The LOCATION value corresponds to a
unique fiber positioner.
               TARGETID           TILEID    LOCATION     Lfa   Tfa   Hgd    Pgd   vsort
           39627569254897060        2480      8337        0     0     1      1      2
           39627569254897060        5609      4091        0     1     1      1      3
           39627569254897060       11875       418        0     0     0      1      1
           39627569254897060       11875       419        1     1     1      1      4


each target, we retain the information on all tiles and TILELOCID that the given target was
reachable on (where Hgd was True), encoded in the TILES and TILELOCIDS columns.
      At this stage, we join to any extra information on the spectroscopic observations that
was not included in the redshift catalog, e.g., the QSO catalog that was compiled separately.
A left-outer join of the spectroscopic columns to the table containing all of the target in-
formation is performed matching on the TARGETID and TILELOCID columns. For ELGs, this
includes information on the OII emission line fits, produced with the spectroscopic release
(as of DR1, these are in separate catalogs from the redshift catalog already joined to, but this
is likely to change for future releases). For QSO, this is the information from the separate
QSO catalog. The result is the ‘full noveto’ data LSS catalog18 . Notably, even after doing
the sort and cutting to unique targets, some of the TILELOCID will not be associated with
targets of the given type, i.e., the given TILELOCID could have been assigned a different type
of tracer, sky, or a standard. The sort minimizes these cases, but this remains an important
aspect of the completeness, discussed in Section 4.3.
      For randoms, we must also cut to unique TARGETID and we do so separately for each
tracer type, as the tracer information is included in the sort. The input for each is the
dark or bright time random combined target and spectroscopic information catalog. We also
apply the cuts to areas with at least one observation in the g, r, z photometric bands, and the
LegacySurvey DR9 imaging maskbits19 that were already applied to the target samples. Bits
1 and 13 were applied for bright time targets and additionally bit 12 for dark time targets. In
addition to the boolean quantities used to sort the data, we define one additional quantity:
      • Zposs : The combination of tile and fiber was either assigned to a target of the given
target class or no unassigned targets of the given target class were reachable by the fiber on
this tile. Its inclusion is a legacy of previous versions of the pipeline and does not currently
serve any particular purpose (but also does no harm).
      The randoms are then sorted by

                                vsort = Hgd Pgd Zposs + Hgd Pgd .                           (4.2)

As for the data, the primary purpose of the sort is to ensure that any entries not in a veto
mask are prioritized relative to those that are and we cut to unique random points by selecting
the highest vsort value for each. The result is the ‘full noveto’ random LSS catalog.

 18
     https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_ROOT/vac/RELEASE/lss/VERSION/LSScats/
full/index.html
  19
     See https://www.legacysurvey.org/dr9/bitmasks/; the data used for the number of exposures and
maskbits are the nexp and maskbits files listed here: https://www.legacysurvey.org/dr9/files/




                                             – 13 –
4.2    Applying Vetos
The ‘full noveto’ catalogs have kept all of the data and random targets that were deemed
reachable when fiberassign was run. The data and randoms at this point will have matching
sky footprints and any angular clustering measurements should match that of the full target
samples (taking the reduced footprint size and systematic targeting variations within the full
footprint into account.). However, to cut the sample to the sky area where redshift could have
been measured successfully and the target sample’s selection function modelled, we apply a
series of veto cuts.
      We cut to True values of the two Boolean quantities, Hgd and Pgd . Hgd being True
denotes that observation corresponding to the particular tile and fiber used ‘good’ hardware.
This is primarily determined from the ZWARN MTL quantity defined in Section 3.2. The cuts
applied based on the ZWARN MTL flag are described in section 6.3.1 of [20]. Notably, we use
the version of the ZWARN MTL information obtained with the same spectroscopic reduction
as the redshift information we use (e.g., iron for DR1). The ZWARN MTL can change with
spectroscopic reduction and the information we use can thus be different from what was used
for the MTL decisions. This is no problem for defining the footprint but does present a
small complication for the ‘alternative-MTL’ process [29] used to obtain joint probabilities
of assignments, described in Section 4.3.
      We apply two additional criteria to define Hgd . The first is that we flag a set of fibers
as ‘bad’, which we re-evaluate with each data release20 . The details of determining the bad
fiber list for DR1 analysis are given in [30], where 60 are flagged and removed from the LSS
catalogs. All TILELOCID (in data and randoms) associated with such fibers have Hgd set to
False. The second is that we apply a threshold on the spectroscopic depth, quantified by
the ‘template signal to noise ratio squared’ value, (TSNR2 (tracer) in the catalogs), defined
in [21]. This is determined per observation, using a constant template spectrum, and thus
depends only on the effective observing time and the detector noise associated with the
particular fiber (and it explicitly does not depend on the source brightness). For DR1, we
apply a threshold of TSNR2 ELG> 80 in dark time and TSNR2 BGS> 1000 in bright time. All
TILELOCID (in data and randoms) below these thresholds have Hgd set to False, which are
1% of the DR1 data for both dark and bright time. The particular choice of values will be
re-evaluated with each data release, but was motivated by the fact that redshift success rates
fall dramatically for data below these thresholds. The effect of the good hardware veto on
the footprint will be the same for all tracer types observed in the given program (dark or
bright).
      We use the Pgd definition to remove data and randoms that could not have been assigned
to particular tile and fiber combinations due to the priority of the target that was assigned.
The choice of exactly what to apply here is not completely obvious and may change with each
data release. Different tracer types overlap in redshift and are thus correlated. Thus, the
structure of any mask determined based on the priority values of one LSS sample is likely to
have at least a small level of correlation with the true structure of other LSS samples.21 For
DR1 analyses, we remove any QSO targets from the ELG sample and use the same priority
value threshold of 3200 for the ELG and LRG samples (recall that ELG HIP have their priority
boosted to 3200, which is the same as LRG). In most cases, LRG targets have higher priority
than ELG targets. However, given that LRGs have a strong angular clustering signal, the
  20
     In the future, we will likely consider different date ranges for different blocks of fibers, corresponding to
distinct changes in the hardware, such as changing a CCD detector.
  21
     Further discussion and analysis of the issue can be found in [13] and references therein.




                                                     – 14 –
LRG and ELG overlap highly in redshift, and 10% of ELG have the same priority as LRG, it
is undesirable to define any veto mask for ELG based on LRG. For QSO, anything assigned
at a priority greater than 3400 is vetoed. For DR1, this only includes a small number of
strong lens candidates that had priority 4000. For BGS, anything with a priority greater
than 2100 is vetoed; only White Dwarf candidates (priority 2998) and strong lens candidates
have such high priorities for bright time observations. The effect of the priority mask on the
footprint will thus generally depend on the tracer, though for DR1 analysis, it is the same
for ELG and LRG.
      In general, we will apply additional vetos based on the imaging data. These may come
from the LegacySurvey DR9 imaging maskbits22 , or from more carefully considering the
details of a particular tracer, as done for LRGs in [23]. When using such a mask for a
particular tracer, the mask values are added to the data and random catalogs, named like,
e.g., LRG_MASK. The mask will in general be different for different tracer types and is likely
to be refined with each data release. For DR1, the choices and their impact are described in
[13]. After applying all three of these vetos, the catalogs are saved without ‘noveto’ in the
name.
      Fig. 3 shows the angular effect of veto masks applied to the DR1 LRG data and random
samples, within a small area of the footprint. Unmasked data can be seen with black points.
The yellow points are areas vetoed due to the priority of what was assigned blocking the
possibility of any LRG assignments. This primarily happens in areas that have only been
covered by one tile; one can observe that significant amounts of such areas are yellow. The
blue points denote data where some aspect of the DESI instrument was flagged as poorly
performing and thus denoted ‘bad hardware’ (i.e., Hgd = False, as defined above). In the
lower left-hand corner of each of the upper panels, one can observe that an entire petal
was so flagged. Looking again at Fig. 2, one can see no data in the location for DR1 and
slightly lower coverage than average as of March 20th, 2024. This is because data with
Hgd = False does not contribute to our coverage determination. At other locations, smaller-
sized patterns are removed; these can correspond to, e.g., amplifier boundaries on the CCDs
that read out the information from the spectrograph or groups of 50 fibers that failed to move
properly due to canbus communication errors. Similar to the priority mask, such areas exist
primarily where only one tile has covered the area. For the vast majority of the combination
of exposures and fibers the DESI hardware performs well and failure is thus especially unlikely
for any area covered more than once. In total, in DR1, only 3% and 2% footprint is vetoed
due to poorly performing hardware, for dark- and bright-time respectively, and these numbers
are expected to decrease in future data releases as the coverage increases (when the same
area is covered again, it is unlikely the hardware will again be poorly performing, especially
given it will be a different area in the focal plane). All of this information is so tracked and
incorporated into the LSS catalog footprint.
      In the DR1 analysis, we make additional cuts that remove the area in the extrema of
imaging property maps, whose creation we describe in Section 5.2. The goal is to remove
only a small amount of the footprint but ensure that non-representative data do not impact
the regressions. The choices applied to DR1 are given in [13] and in total remove 3.4% of
the footprint. We expect the particular cuts and the fractional area removed to be updated
with each data release. We add ‘ HPmapcut’ to the file name for these catalogs. Thus, as of
DR1, for ‘full’ catalogs we have:

 22
      https://www.legacysurvey.org/dr9/bitmasks/




                                                   – 15 –
Figure 3. Available LRG targets (left) and randoms (right) in a small area of the DESI footprint.
The top panels show the results in the DR1 catalogs and the bottom panels show the results as of
March 7th, 2024. Various veto masks are indicated. The unmasked data is shown in black. One can
observe matching patterns in data and randoms, as intended.




    • ‘full noveto’; the catalogs that contain everything reachable, as determined by fib-
erassign

     • ‘full’; the catalogs that have good hardware, priority, and imaging conditions vetos
applied

    • ‘full HPmapcut’; the catalogs that have an additional cut applied based on imaging
properties.




                                             – 16 –
4.3   Assignment Completeness Definitions
As of DR1, we determine all assignment completeness statistics using the ‘full’ catalogs, i.e.,
those determined before applying the image property map cuts. Statistics are determined at
the target-sample level, i.e., a complete sample would be one where all of the targets of the
type under consideration had been assigned a fiber, without any consideration of any results
obtained from the measured spectra. Thus, the total completeness, Ctot that we determine,
for any set of targets, is the number of those targets assigned to a fiber divided by the total
number within the set.
       As of DR1, we have divided the fiber assignment incompleteness into two components,
in a way at mimics the SDSS approach. They are:
       • fTLID (column named FRACZ TILELOCID) This is computed per TARGETID and is the
inverse of the number of targets sharing the same TILELOCID, NTLID , (and thus all of the
targets with the same TILELOCID will have the same value). Only one of the targets at a
given TILELOCID could have been observed. The NTLID value is essentially the number of
targets that were competing for the fiber. Thus, fTLID , can be thought of as a per TILELOCID
completeness, and its inverse can be used as a completeness weight. Such a weight is analogous
to the close-pair weights used in SDSS. It accounts for all fiber assignment incompleteness
due to competition for fibers between targets of the same type. As of DR1, the values are
determined before applying vetos. The good hardware and priority vetos are associated with
TILELOCID and the thus order makes no difference for those vetos and fTLID values. However,
applying the imaging veto after determining fTLID implies that targets inside of the imaging
veto mask with a TILELOCID matching that of an assigned target outside of the veto mask
will count in the statistics. We will revisit this choice in future data releases.
       • ftile (column named FRAC TLOBS TILES) This second component of the assignment
completeness accounts for any incompleteness not accounted for by fTLID . More specifically,
it accounts for the fraction of potential assignments that were not associated with fibers that
were observed by the target type and were not rejected by the priority veto. This could be due
to, e.g., a standard star or sky fiber needing to be assigned to meet the minimum threshold.
Such assignments are not deterministic; all targets are randomly assigned a SUBPRIORITY,
that provides a relative preference for assignment for targets that have the same priority
values. Standards and skies are thus most likely to take an assignment from the targets that
have (randomly) been assigned the lowest SUBPRIORITY. Competition with other target types
can also contribute, especially for ELGs, which compete with LRGs (and most LRGs have a
higher priority for assignment). However, the ELGs that are promoted to LRG priority are
done so at random. Thus, in all of these cases, the process should be random (in terms of
the sky area affected), within the given set of overlapping tiles and such targets would not be
accounted for with fTLID . All of the unassigned targets should have a non-zero probability
of assignment, provided a different random seed when producing DESI target catalogs.
       We determine ftile by calculating the fraction of targets that are at a TILELOCID assigned
to the given target type (e.g., LRG), determined for each unique set of overlapping tiles, tgroup
(recorded as TILES in the catalogs; see Section 3.3). The size of any individual tgroup will
depend on the geometry of the overlapping tiles. Any change of the color in Fig. 2 represents
a change in the tgroup (as the number of over-lapping tiles is constant within a tgroup , by
definition). Recall that in Section 4.1, we defined the boolean quantity Tfa that is True if the
given TILELOCID was assigned to the given target type (but         Pnot necessarily the particular
target). Thus, for any selection of data, this completeness is       Tfa /Ntot . Phrased differently,
it is (Nassigned + Nassociated )/Ntot , where Nassociated is the number of targets not assigned but




                                               – 17 –
at TILELOCID that were assigned to the given target type (and Ntot is the total number of
targets of the given type). We determine it for each unique tgroup and it is thus
                                                  P
                                                   i∈tgroup Tfa,i
                                ftile (tgroup ) =                 .                 (4.3)
                                                  Ntot (tgroup )

Importantly, the randoms contain the same tgroup information as the data (which were used
to determine the number of overlapping tiles mapped in Fig. 2) and we thus add ftile (tgroup )
to the randoms after determining the values for the data. Each unique group of overlapping
tiles (tgroup ) is analogous to an SDSS ‘sector’ and ftile is thus analogous to CBOSS .
      The total assignment completeness is simply the number of assigned targets divided by
the total number of targets. Per unique tgroup we also record the total assignment complete-
ness, Ctile (column named COMP TILE). This quantity is used to present maps of the DR1
completeness in [13].
      The combination of ftile and fTLID provide the total assignment completeness. We thus
expect that if one selects data that has been assigned (Lfa = True) the sum P    of their inverse
should be the total number of targets in the full catalog, i.e., we expect          1/ftile [Lfa =
True]1/fTLID [Lfa = True] = Ntot .

5        Modelling Selection Function Variations

As of DR1, we have identified three primary effects that we must model in order to properly
determine the variations in the DESI selection function (within the observed area defined
in the previous sections). They are all accounted for in the catalogs by applying weights to
either data or randoms. The process thus makes the expected ratio of data to random (after
weighting) constant23 . These are variations in completeness, target sample properties due to
imaging properties, and the ability to measure good redshifts due to the effective exposure
time of DESI observations or properties concerning DESI hardware (e.g., the location on
the focal plane). We will go through each in this section, paying particular attention to
the technical details of how they can be accounted for in the DESI LSS catalog structure.
Particular analysis choices for the DR1 LSS catalogs are detailed in [13] and at most only
briefly described here. Weights to optimize the signal-to-noise of clustering observations will
be discussed in Section 7.

5.1       Assignment Completeness
For assignment completeness weights, the approach is to correct for the probability of assign-
ment. By construction, the correct target density can be recovered by taking the observed
number of targets and dividing it by the assignment completeness. The same holds for any
sub-selection of the data (e.g., by redshift), on average, except the noise increases. Thus, any
one-point statistic can be determined without bias by weighting by an accurate inverse prob-
ability of assignment. One could thus use Ctot = fTLID ftile and wcomp = 1/Ctot . For many
quick calculations, this is indeed used. However, applying ftile as a weight on the randoms
provides the same density contrast. This has better noise properties in most cases and, e.g.,
it is applied to the randoms in the DR1 LSS ‘clustering’ catalogs, described in Section 7.
We expect the pobs probability determined from the alternative MTL realizations (described
    23
   For any effect that is possible to account for with weights on the randoms, one could equivalently sub-
sample the randoms rather than weight them.




                                                 – 18 –
below) to be a statistical match to fTLID ftile . The completeness weights are discussed further
in Section 7 and are always taken from the fTLID , ftile , pobs quantities available in the full
catalogs.
      Properly accounting for the assignment incompleteness effects on clustering measure-
ment requires simulations of the assignment histories. To break ties in the assignment of
fibers to targets of the same class, every DESI target has a SUBPRIORITY that is a random
number between 0 and 1, and the target with the greatest value is assigned the fiber. Alter-
nate realizations of the DESI survey assignment history can thus be obtained by randomizing
the SUBPRIORITY values and re-running the fiber assignment. To do so properly, assignments
must follow the same process as applied to the ‘merged target ledger’ (MTL), which tracks
the assignment history of every DESI target, updating information after every observation.
The process of simulating DESI fiber assignment after randomizing the SUBPRIORITY values
is thus referred to as the ‘alternative MTL’ process (‘altmtl’), as each realization represents
a separate MTL history. This process as developed for DESI SV3 and DR1 LSS catalogs is
described fully in [29]. Many realizations can be used to record whether or not a given target
was assigned in each realization with a bit map, which can then be used to measure unbiased
2-point functions via pair-wise inverse probabilities [31]. Importantly, in such a case, ftile
should not be applied to the randoms, and the random redshifts (see Section 7.2) should be
sampled accounting for the individual inverse probability weights, 1/pobs , for each observed
target, given by the altmtl.

5.2     Density Variations due to Imaging
The DESI target samples can have variations in their number density caused by changes in
the conditions of the imaging used to define their selection, both in the total projected target
density and in the shape of the dN/dz. If untreated, these variations will cause spurious
clustering results to be obtained from the DESI LSS catalogs. The variations thus must be
modelled and corrected with some treatment applied to either the data or randoms.
      A now standard approach is to perform regressions between the observed density and
maps of imaging properties. To employ this approach, the values of image properties are first
attached to the DESI ‘full’ random catalogs. This is done at the finest resolution available for
the given map (e.g., the imaging depth is sampled from the sub-arcsecond-sized pixels that
make up the LegacySurvey imaging data). We then average the values put into the random
files within Healpix [32] pixels Nside=256 (resolution value). The process of producing
these maps closely follows that for the ‘pixelized weight maps’ described in section 4.5.2 of
[19]. The maps are produced separately for the data in the Northern (BASS/MzLS) and
Southern (DECam) imaging regions and are used to perform regressions to obtain weights
for systematic variation in target densities. Further details on the maps used for DR1 analysis
are provided in [13].
      Given the imaging property maps, many regression methods exist for modelling trends
with the observed DESI density. As of DR1, three have been incorporated into the DESI
LSS pipeline. For each, the final result is a weight attached to the observed redshift that
nulls the observed trends. These are:

      • The neural net method sysnet24 , most recently applied to [33] and denoted WEIGHT SN
        in the catalogs;
 24
      https://github.com/mehdirezaie/sysnetdev




                                                 – 19 –
      • The random forest method regressis25 , first applied in [34] and denoted WEIGHT RF
        in the catalogs;
      • The linear method applied to eBOSS LSS catalogs [9, 35] (WEIGHT IMLIN in the cata-
        logs).
For each, the density contrast between data and randoms in the ‘full’ catalogs is determined
and is then regressed against the selected imaging property masks. For the data, good
spectroscopic observations in particular redshift ranges are selected and completeness weights
are applied, e.g., for DR1 LRGs, we perform the regressions separately in the three redshift
bins used in the clustering analysis: 0.4 < z < 0.6, 0.6 < z < 0.8, 0.8 < z < 1.1. The weights
are then included in the ‘full’ data catalogs based on the true redshift. This approach allows
any redshift-dependent corrections to be applied before the catalog-level blinding (as applied
in DR1) shifts the redshifts [36]. The full details on their implementation and results for
DR1 are presented in [13].
     The regression methods described will only correct the projected density (within what-
ever chosen redshift bin) and will not account for any variations that are smooth with redshift
and thus cause variation in the normalized dN/dz. This can be included as an additional
weight that depends on redshift as well as the map features. The impact of fitting for and
including such a weight for the DR1 ELG sample is studied in [37].
     Ideally, none of the weights described here would be necessary and we could instead
forward-model the target sample selections and thus include all fluctuations in the randoms.
The forward-modelling technique Obiwan [38] has indeed shown promise in simulating DESI
ELG [37] and LRG [39] samples. This has made it a vital tool in explaining the observed
variation and identifying what must be due to calibration issues (especially of the Galactic
extinction corrections). It is not yet at the level where the dN/dz at a given sky location
can be predicted at the accuracy (in comparison to the data) and precision (limited by the
number of simulations run) required for use as randoms. If sufficient improvements in the
forward modelling are achieved, the results could be used either as weights to apply to the
data or directly to the randoms, to correct trends with imaging properties.

5.3     Redshift Failures
Similar to the weights that account for trends between the observed DESI density and the
imaging properties of the target samples, we perform regressions on the data to uncover
trends between the DESI observing properties and the redshift success rate. The model
parameters of the regressions are determined by selecting DESI data of the given tracer type
observed with good hardware (i.e., Hgd = True; see Section 4.2) and features relating to the
DESI observation. The model can then be applied to the full catalogs to add new columns
for the predicted redshift success and the weight, wzf (WEIGHT ZFAIL in the catalogs), to
account for relative fluctuation in the predicted success.
     We expect the dominant source of variation in redshift success rate, fzgood to be the
‘template signal to noise ratio squared’, Sratio (TSNR2 (tracer) in the catalogs). This is
determined per observation, using a constant template spectrum; it is thus equivalent to
an effective observing time. See [21] for details. We further expect fzgood to be monotonic
with Sratio . The redshift success rate for DESI tracers as a function of effective observing
time in early DESI observations can be found in each of the target selection studies for each
respective tracer BGS, QSO, LRG, ELG: [22–25].
 25
      https://github.com/echaussidon/regressis




                                                 – 20 –
      The fzgood trends with Sratio are further expected to be greatest for the targets with
the least fiberflux. For ELGs, the overlap between the observed [O II] wavelength and sky
lines as a function of redshift introduces a strong redshift dependence that must be taken
into account. Thus, for DR1, the weights for BGS, LRG, and QSO are a function of Sratio
and fiberflux, while for ELGs, they are a function of Sratio and redshift. The overall process
of accounting for these redshift success trends in the DR1 data is described in [30] and the
specific concerns of ELGs (including any residual dependency on fiberflux) are addressed in
[40].
      Regression against further metadata, such as the spectrograph number, the focal plane
location, and the given positioner’s accuracy could be added to provide a more complete
model for the expected redshift success rate. For DR1, trends with these metadata (and
more) are investigated and their impacts on clustering measurements are demonstrated in
[30] and [40] and found to be negligible. However, the significance of the underlying trends
in the data suggests the results should be re-evaluated with every data release.
      As of DR1, we are only able to account for trends with redshift failures by applying
weights to the data. To instead apply the results to randoms, each random point would need
to be correctly associated with a particular observation, per tracer. In the DR1 randoms, we
only determine whether the point could have been assigned to the given tracer type, and when
choosing the particular associated observation we choose the one with the greatest Sratio . It
is likely possible to improve this by considering the ‘pass’ (the N th time the area has been
covered, one through up to seven) and the probability of assigning a given TILELOCID to a
given target type (e.g., using the altmtl results).


6   Enabling Null Tests and Density Determination

After the weights for the selection function have been determined and added to the ‘full’
catalogs, numerous null tests can be performed and the number density as a function of
redshift, n(z), can be calculated. Typical null tests include measuring the density of a
DESI sample as a function of some observational property (e.g., effective observing time) or
foreground map (e.g. Galactic extinction) and verifying that the variation is consistent with
the statistical noise. Passing such tests validates the selection function modeling. Providing
this ability on the full catalogs is important for DESI analysis, as it allows the catalogs to be
validated and n(z) determined independently of the ‘clustering’ catalogs that are directly used
for clustering measurements (and discussed in the following section). This allows catalog-
level blinding, such as done for DR1 [36], to be performed that does not interfere with
the validation process. All of the DR1 work on the selection function and its validation
([13, 30, 37, 40]) was performed on the unaltered data. However, any effect on the clustering
measurements was demonstrated using the blinded catalogs, up until the analysis was frozen
and the DESI collaboration unblinded the results.
      Providing the n(z) for the unaltered data is important, e.g., for ensuring that simulations
reproduce properties of the measured data. In DR1, the blinding method shifted redshifts
coherently, to alter any inferred distance scales [36]. Therefore, the blinded catalogs could
not be used (directly) for n(z) measurements. The n(z) can be calculated for any selected
region by counting galaxies weighted by their assignment completeness, thereby providing
the expected n(z) for a sample with no assignment incompleteness. The volume the galaxies
occupy can be determined by assuming a cosmological model and calculating the volume of
the spherical shell given the redshift bounds. This can then be multiplied by the fractional




                                             – 21 –
sky coverage. The area of the sky can be determined by counting the number of randoms in
the LSS catalog and dividing by the density of randoms, which is 2500 deg−2 per DESI LSS
random file.

7        Clustering Catalogs
The DESI LSS ‘clustering’ catalogs are cut to good spectroscopic observations and the redshift
range intended for clustering analysis. They only include the columns required to calculate
clustering statistics.

7.1       Reducing Data to what is used for Clustering
For both data and randoms, the clustering files take the ‘full’ LSS catalogs and reduce
them to a subset of columns necessary for calculating clustering statistics26 . The full LSS
catalogs contain no cuts based on the outcome of the redshift pipeline. We cut to only those
objects with good redshifts to produce the clustering catalogs. They will further be cut to
the redshift range of interest and/or where we are confident we have properly modelled the
selection function. In this subsection, we describe the process applied to the data.
      The LSS catalog construction code can trivially accommodate any choice based on the
properties of the redshift fit. Two quantities likely to always be relevant for selecting good
redshifts are the redshift pipeline flag ZWARN and the ∆χ2 (DELTACHI2) obtained from the
redshift fitting pipeline between the best and next-best-fit redshifts. For DR1, good redshifts
are decided based on the same criteria as for the SV3 catalogs described in [11] and these
choices match the recommendations of the respective targeting catalogs [22–25]. The data
are also cut to the redshift range within which we have modelled the selection function. The
details of the selection applied to DR1 can be found in [13].
      For the data, each type of weight to account for the selection function, described in the
subsections of Section 5, is condensed to a single weight, wcomp (WEIGHT COMP) for complete-
ness, wsys (WEIGHT SYS) for target density fluctuations due to imaging conditions, and wzfail
(WEIGHT ZFAIL) to account for changes in the relative redshift success rates. The weights are
combined to produce the total weight, wtot (WEIGHT), i.e.:
                                   wtot = wcomp wsys wzfail .                             (7.1)
The wtot will later be re-scaled (coherently for data and randoms) based on the completeness
variations, as described in Section 7.3. While the above description currently only applies
to DR1, we expect it to remain true throughout future DESI releases. If, e.g., we account
for variations with imaging systematics by imparting variations into the randoms, we would
simply set wsys = 1 for all of the data.
      All weights are kept in the ‘clustering’ catalogs to make it easy to test the impact of
ignoring a given weight (e.g., one would divide the wtot column by wzfail when running clus-
tering measurements to these the effect of ignoring redshift failure weights). Similarly, when
multiple versions of the regressions against imaging properties have been run, we provide
each of the individual weights for testing. Additionally, we keep the number of overlapping
tiles (NTILE) to allow tests of clustering as a function of coverage. The comprehensive list
with definitions will be updated with each data release.27 Any desired columns not provided
can be obtained via a TARGETID match to the ‘full’ catalogs (or any other DESI catalogs).
    26
    Any later desired columns can be obtained via a TARGETID match to the ‘full’ catalogs.
    27
    https://desidatamodel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/DESI_ROOT/vac/RELEASE/lss/VERSION/LSScats/
clustering/clustering_dat.html




                                            – 22 –
7.2     Adding Radial Information to Randoms
As of DR1, we assign radial information to the random catalogs by sampling points from the
data. This will provide a perfect match between the observed dN/dz of the data and the
randoms. This perfect match comes at a cost, as purely radial modes of clustering will be
nulled and the effect must be accounted for in any analysis. We refer to this as the radial
integral constraint [41]. This is a practical choice based on the fact that true dN/dz cannot
be known from first principles or even easily approximated by simple functions of redshift.28
If the dN/dz of DESI data can be shown to be accurately predicted in the future (e.g., from
first principles and forward modeling), the choice of sampling from the data can be easily
revisited within the LSS pipeline.
      Radial information is added to the randoms separately in each of the relevant photomet-
ric regions, based on how the target selection was split. For BGS, ELG, and LRG samples,
the target selection was defined separately in the DECam (‘S’) and BASS/MzLS (‘N’) re-
gions. For QSO, the ‘S’ region was further divided into DES and notDES regions. In DR1,
we simply randomly sample the data within each respective region when assigning redshifts
to the randoms in each region. We sample the redshifts, associated weights, and any other
properties (e.g., photometry) that we might later want to use to produce subsamples from
the data to assign them to the randoms. The TARGETID of the data is also sampled (and
stored as TARGETID DATA), to keep a record and also enable further columns to be added later
if desired. Such sampling ensures that the weighted dN/dz of the randoms matches that of
the data in each region, and will continue to match as long as one cuts both the data and
randoms on the same properties. If the definition of wcomp used for the data is only 1/fTLID ,
as in DR1, the random wtot then gets multiplied by ftile (to account for incompleteness that
was not yet accounted for via weights on the data).
      We then normalize such that the weighted ratio of data to randoms is the same in each
photometric region. We do so by multiplying the wtot of the randoms by the required factor.
The data and random that were split by region are concatenated into one catalog. At this
point, both the data and random clustering catalogs have four fundamental columns that
can, e.g., be passed to clustering estimators: RA, DEC, Z, WEIGHT, which are, respectively,
the angular celestial coordinates, the redshift, and the combined weight, wtot . In DR1, we
then split them again by Galactic hemisphere, ‘NGC’ and ‘SGC’. The following subsection
describes how we re-factor wtot and add an additional weight for consideration, to optimize
the signal-to-noise of clustering measurements.

7.3     Weighting to Optimally Balance Sampling Rate
Given a local density and a power spectrum amplitude, [43] describe how to optimally weight
galaxies for power spectra measurements. It is common practice to assume some fiducial
power spectrum amplitude, P0 , and then only apply a weight, wFKP that is based on how
the number density changes with redshift. The DESI DR1 sample has large completeness
variations that are primarily driven by the number of overlapping tiles, Ntile . Therefore, we
developed a method that uses an estimate of the density as a function of both redshift and
the number of overlapping tiles, n(z, Ntile ), which can be used in the standard ‘FKP’ weight
formula:
                                wFKP = 1/(1 + n(z, Ntile )P0 ).                          (7.2)
 28
      Though, see [42] for an exception.




                                           – 23 –
     To use the above definition for wFKP , we first factor the completeness from the data and
randoms, to account for the fact that we are already up-weighting data based on completeness.
We do so by considering the completeness and related weights as a function of the number
of overlapping tiles, Ntile . We calculate ⟨wcomp ⟩(Ntile ), ⟨ftile ⟩(Ntile ), and ⟨Ctile ⟩(Ntile ). To
account for the fact that galaxies have been up-weighted by wcomp , we divide wtot for both
data and random by ⟨wcomp ⟩(Ntile ), i.e.,

                                 wtot (Ntile ) = wtot /⟨wcomp ⟩(Ntile ).                         (7.3)

The same quantity ⟨wcomp ⟩(Ntile ) is used to determine n(z, Ntile ), given the already estimated
n(z) for a complete sample (defined in Section 6):

                          n(z, Ntile ) = n(z)⟨ftile ⟩(Ntile )/⟨wcomp ⟩(Ntile ).                  (7.4)

The n(z, Ntile ) values for each data and random point are stored as the column NX in the
catalogs. In general, we expect that the highest signal-to-noise clustering measurements
will be obtained by weighting both data and randoms by wtot wFKP . However, this could
depend on the specific type of clustering measurement or the scales being used and one
could potentially obtain a better weight for their analysis that replaces wFKP (for both data
and randoms). The wtot should always be used as is for data and randoms, with possible
exceptions described in the following subsection.

7.4       Producing Subsamples
One can select samples from the data and randoms, applying the same selections to both,
using any of the columns in the clustering catalogs other than the weights. A caveat is that
the wsys may no longer be appropriate (and using them as is may indeed bias the clustering
                                                                                           ′ ,
results) if one cuts on photometric properties. In such a case, one could determine new wsys
                                                                29      ′
and then multiply the existing wtot for both data and random by wsys /wsys .
       The BGS sample, in particular, is one where results will be obtained by splitting it in
many different ways. Further, given its selection is flux-limited, the sample characteristics
will evolve strongly with redshift. In DR1, a choice was made to simplify the analysis of the
BGS sample by applying an r-band absolute magnitude threshold, based on k-corrections
determined by FastSpecFit [44, 45] and an e-correction matching that applied to the EDR
[11]. Full details are provided in [13]. For this sample, we chose to apply the cut on the
‘full’ catalogs and then proceed through the same LSS catalog pipeline steps as any other
sample (i.e., starting with the selection function determination and including the assignment
of radial information to the randoms). One advantage of proceeding in this fashion was that
we preserved the sky density of the randoms; i.e., no photometric cut needed to be applied
to the randoms and their density was able to remain 2500 deg−2 . A similar process can be
applied to any sample selected from the ‘full’ catalogs, assuming any geometrical component
can be equally applied to the randoms.

8        Summary

We have described the technical framework for producing DESI LSS catalogs. The linchpin
of the process is the ability to use the DESI fiberassign software to track the sky geometry
    29    ′
    The wsys can be attached to the randoms based on the TARGETID DATA attached when sampling data
redshifts




                                                – 24 –
                                     DESI LSS Catalog Pipeline
    Gather and Process        Target Catalogs in the              Model Selection
                                                                                            Clustering Catalogs (§7)
        Inputs (§3)             DESI footprint (§4)            Function Variations (§5)
     Redshift information +                                                                   Cut to good redshifts in
                                                                  Model completeness
        spectroscopic                                                                             modeled range
                                                                      variations
          metadata
              +                Sort and cut to unique                                                     +
                                      targets                                 +
                                                                                                  Add weights to
      Target information +                                           Model variations in
                                                                                                optimize clustering
     photometric metadata                                            input target density
                                           +                                                    measurement S/N

              +                                                               +                          +
                                Apply vetos based on
                                hardware status, sky
     Potential assignment      conditions, priority, etc.          Model variations in             Assign radial
         information                                             redshift success rates       information to randoms

             =                           =                                  =                           =
    Combined target and                                          Full catalogs, including
        spectroscopic               Full catalogs                  selection function           Clustering catalogs
    information catalogs                                                 weights




Figure 4. A flowchart detailing the DESI LSS catalog pipeline construction steps. The full context,
including key definitions, can be found within the labeled sections of this paper.


where DESI observations were possible to an accuracy of better than one arcsecond. Further,
with every observed DESI tile, we evaluate the hardware performance at a level as fine as
individual fibers. This combination allows us to account for the irregular and dynamic shape
of the footprint associated with any observed DESI tile. See Fig. 1.
     A flowchart detailing the steps in the DESI LSS catalog pipeline is shown in Fig. 4. We
summarize these steps as:

   • 1) Collect all information on reachable targets and randoms. This step is
     detailed in Section 3. The information associated with every instance where a target
     or random was reachable is combined. Each unique TARGETID can appear up to
     the number of overlapping tiles at its sky location. Information from the associated
     spectroscopic observations is matched to this data, as is all information relevant to veto
     masks. After removing data associated with poorly performing hardware, quantities
     such as the number of overlapping tiles can be determined. See Fig. 2.

   • 2) Reduce targets and randoms to unique entries. This step is detailed in
     Section 4 and produces what we refer to as the ‘full’ catalogs. The results from step
     1) are carefully sorted to keep the most relevant TARGETID occurrence when cutting
     to unique entries, as described in Section 4.1. The result is unique entries for data and
     randoms, for every target that was reachable to a DESI fiber positioner (whether or
     not it was assigned and without regard for the results of the redshift fitting pipeline),
     including all veto mask information. The area within different types of veto masks is
     shown in Fig. 3. Veto masks can then be applied, as described in Section 4.2, and then
     the completeness statistics defined in Section 4.3 can be determined.

   • 3) Model selection function variations. The observed density of DESI data will
     vary within the footprint due to at least three known effects: fiber assignment incom-




                                                            – 25 –
      pleteness, fluctuations in the target sample inherited from properties of the imaging
      data, and fluctuations in the DESI redshift success rate due to properties of DESI ob-
      servations and/or hardware components. In Section 5, we detail how these effects can
      be modelled and validated using the ‘full’ catalogs, typically with the use of weights.
      We further describe where the current framework allows weights to be applied to data
      and/or randoms and the basics of the approach applied to DR1 (with full details on
      the DR1 approach contained in [13]). Section 6 then discusses how validation tests can
      be applied to the ‘full’ catalogs.

    • 4) Produce catalogs intended for clustering measurements. Given modelling
      of the selection function, clustering statistics accounting for all identified effects can
      be calculated. To simplify this, we produce ‘clustering’ catalogs that include only the
      information relevant to producing the clustering measurement, as detailed in Section 7.
      Any catalog-level blinding that is to be applied happens between the full and clustering
      catalog stages. First, the data clustering catalogs are created by cutting to ‘good’
      redshifts within the range of interest. The selection function weights are combined
      into a total WEIGHT column. Radial information is then added to the random catalogs,
      matching the weighted dN/dz of the data (described in Section 7.2). We then apply
      weights to both the data and randoms that are meant to maximize the expected signal
      to noise, given the changes in the observed number density as a function redshift and
      number of overlapping tiles (described in Section 7.3). Finally, we provide information
      on how one could further divide the clustering catalogs.

     This work describes the status of the DESI LSS catalog pipeline, as of DR1. Particular
analysis choices for DR1 are detailed in [13]. We expect that there will be many improvements
applied to future DESI data releases, but these will mainly pertain to the particular analysis
choices. We expect that the framework we have developed and the steps outlined above will
remain nearly constant throughout the lifetime of DESI. However, some changes, corrections,
and/or additions to the pipeline are inevitable and these will be detailed in the corresponding
future data releases and/or LSS catalog papers.

9   Data Availability

The plotting scripts and data used to generate all of the plots in this paper will be uploaded
to https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11193828.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Of-
fice of Science, Office of High-Energy Physics, under Contract No. DE–AC02–05CH11231,
and by the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Sci-
ence User Facility under the same contract. Additional support for DESI was provided
by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of Astronomical Sciences under
Contract No. AST-0950945 to the NSF’s National Optical-Infrared Astronomy Research
Laboratory; the Science and Technology Facilities Council of the United Kingdom; the Gor-
don and Betty Moore Foundation; the Heising-Simons Foundation; the French Alternative
Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA); the National Council of Humanities, Sci-
ence and Technology of Mexico (CONAHCYT); the Ministry of Science and Innovation of




                                             – 26 –
Spain (MICINN), and by the DESI Member Institutions: https://www.desi.lbl.gov/
collaborating-institutions. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the U. S. National Science Foundation, the U. S. Department of Energy, or any of
the listed funding agencies.
      The DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys consist of three individual and complementary
projects: the Dark Energy Camera Legacy Survey (DECaLS), the Beijing-Arizona Sky Survey
(BASS), and the Mayall z-band Legacy Survey (MzLS). DECaLS, BASS and MzLS together
include data obtained, respectively, at the Blanco telescope, Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory, NSF’s NOIRLab; the Bok telescope, Steward Observatory, University of Ari-
zona; and the Mayall telescope, Kitt Peak National Observatory, NOIRLab. NOIRLab is
operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA) under a co-
operative agreement with the National Science Foundation. Pipeline processing and analyses
of the data were supported by NOIRLab and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Legacy Surveys also uses data products from the Near-Earth Object Wide-field Infrared Sur-
vey Explorer (NEOWISE), a project of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of
Technology, funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Legacy Surveys
was supported by: the Director, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics of the U.S.
Department of Energy; the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE
Office of Science User Facility; the U.S. National Science Foundation, Division of Astronom-
ical Sciences; the National Astronomical Observatories of China, the Chinese Academy of
Sciences and the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation. LBNL is managed by the
Regents of the University of California under contract to the U.S. Department of Energy.
The complete acknowledgments can be found at https://www.legacysurvey.org/.
      Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U. S. National
Science Foundation, the U. S. Department of Energy, or any of the listed funding agencies.
      The authors are honored to be permitted to conduct scientific research on Iolkam Du’ag
(Kitt Peak), a mountain with particular significance to the Tohono O’odham Nation.

A    Glossary

A glossary of DESI quantities and jargon is available at https://data.desi.lbl.gov/doc/
glossary/. Below, we repeat some of the entries that are most relevant for the LSS catalogs
and provide entries for terms and quantities defined by the LSS process.
• BGS ‘Bright Galaxy Sample’; Galaxies targeted during bright time (see below); the sample
is primarily flux-limited [22].
• bright time: DESI observations taken during ‘bright’ conditions, as defined in [46]. BGS
are the only LSS targets during bright time.
• dark time: DESI observations taken during ‘dark’ conditions, as defined in [46]. ELG,
LRG, QSO are observed during dark time.
• desitarget: The code package used to select targets for DESI spectroscopic observa-
tion and change their status based on their observation history; [19] https://github.com/
desihub/desitarget.
• ELG ‘Emission Line Galaxy’; a class of DESI targets (see below) selected with the ex-
pectation they will yield a detection of OII flux with redshift z between 0.6 and 1.6. The
selection is defined in [25].




                                           – 27 –
• fiber: An individual fiber optic from a positioner on the focal plane to a spectrograph.
Fibers are numbered sequentially from 0 to 4999, corresponding to value of FIBER in the
catalogs.
• fiber positioner: A two arm moveable robot holding a DESI fiber on the focal plane.
• fiberassign: The code package used to determine which targets can be assigned to which
fiber on the DESI focal plane; [28], https://github.com/desihub/fiberassign.
• Legacy Surveys: The program that delivered the photometric information used to
select targets for DESI spectroscopy, via their data release 9 (DR9); [26, 27], https://www.
legacysurvey.org/dr9/.
• LOCATION: The identifier corresponding to a particular fiber positioner. Each LOCATION
value has a one-to-one mapping to each FIBER value.
• LRG: ‘Luminous Red Galaxy’; a class of DESI targets distinguished by their red colours,
resulting from a strong 4000 angstrom break.
• MTL: The ‘Merged Target Ledger’ contains all of the information on how the state of a
target has changed. It is updated through desitarget (see above) and controls its priority
in fiberassign (see above). Primarily, a target will go from unobserved (and thus high
PRIORITY; see below) to observed (and thus low PRIORITY).
• PRIORITY: The quantity given to targets to determine the relative preference for assigning
a fiber. The initial PRIORITY are determined based on the target type and the values are
reduced after a successful observation.
• QSO: Technically ‘Quasi-Stellar Object’, but we use it synonymously with ‘quasar’; a class
of DESI targets likely to be quasars [24]. Those with redshifts > 2.1 are ’Lyman-α’ quasars,
which are at high enough redshift to allow measurement of ’Lyman-α’ forest absorption.
• random: Object with celestial coordinates randomly selected at a uniform density from
a specified region on the sky.
• target: Object selected via photometry for DESI spectroscopic followup by desitarget
(see above), but not necessarily observed (yet) by DESI. Each has a unique TARGETID. Sim-
ilarly, randoms (see above) that only occupy sky locations where there was Legacy Survey
(see above) DR9 imaging were produced by desitarget and have unique TARGETID.
• tile: A single DESI pointing on the sky with assignments of which fibers should observe
which targets; each has a unique TILEID.
• TILES A string listing the tiles that the target appeared on, using the TILEIDs sorted
in ascending order and separated by ‘-’. Each unique TILES represents a unique group of
overlapping tiles.
• TILELOCID: The identifier we use to match to information associated with a particular tile
and fiber, defined as 10000TILEID+LOCATION.
• TSNR2: Template Signal-to-Noise Squared. A signal-to-noise metric weighted by what
wavelengths matter most for determining the redshift of DESI targets, given their magnitude
and redshift distributions. This depends upon target class, e.g. Lyman-alpha QSO TSNR2
more heavily weights blue wavelengths, while ELG TSNR2 more heavily weights redder
wavelengths which cover the emission lines for the DESI redshifts of interest. TSNR2 depends
upon the noise properties of individual spectra, but not the signal properties of the target.
It is fully defined in [21].

References
 [1] DESI Collaboration, A. Aghamousa, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, L.E. Allen et al., The DESI




                                             – 28 –
    Experiment Part I: Science,Targeting, and Survey Design, arXiv e-prints (2016)
    arXiv:1611.00036 [1611.00036].
 [2] DESI Collaboration, DESI 2024 I: Data Release 1 of the Dark Energy Spectroscopic
     Instrument, in preparation (2024) .
 [3] DESI Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al., DESI
     2024 III: Baryon Acoustic Oscillations from Galaxies and Quasars, arXiv e-prints (2024)
     arXiv:2404.03000 [2404.03000].
 [4] DESI Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al., DESI
     2024 IV: Baryon Acoustic Oscillations from the Lyman Alpha Forest, arXiv e-prints (2024)
     arXiv:2404.03001 [2404.03001].
 [5] DESI Collaboration, DESI 2024 V: Analysis of the full shape of two-point clustering statistics
     from galaxies and quasars, in preparation (2024) .
 [6] DESI Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al., DESI
     2024 VI: Cosmological Constraints from the Measurements of Baryon Acoustic Oscillations,
     arXiv e-prints (2024) arXiv:2404.03002 [2404.03002].
 [7] DESI Collaboration, DESI 2024 VII: Cosmological constraints from full-shape analyses of the
     two-point clustering statistics measurements, in preparation (2024) .
 [8] DESI Collaboration, DESI 2024 VIII: Constraints on Primordial Non-Gaussianities, in
     preparation (2024) .
 [9] A.J. Ross et al., The Completed SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey:
     Large-scale structure catalogues for cosmological analysis, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 498
     (2020) 2354 [2007.09000].
[10] DESI Collaboration, A.G. Adame, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, G. Aldering et al., Validation
     of the Scientific Program for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, AJ 167 (2024) 62
     [2306.06307].
[11] DESI collaboration, The Early Data Release of the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument,
     2306.06308.
[12] J. Moon, D. Valcin, M. Rashkovetskyi, C. Saulder, J.N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen et al., First detection
     of the BAO signal from early DESI data, MNRAS 525 (2023) 5406 [2304.08427].
[13] DESI Collaboration, DESI 2024 II: Sample definitions, characteristics and two-point clustering
     statistics, in preparation (2024) .
[14] E. Paillas, Z. Ding, X. Chen, H. Seo, N. Padmanabhan, A. de Mattia et al., Optimal
     Reconstruction of Baryon Acoustic Oscillations for DESI 2024, arXiv e-prints (2024)
     arXiv:2404.03005 [2404.03005].
[15] M. Pinon et al., Mitigation of DESI fiber assignment incompleteness effect on two-point
     clustering with small angular scale truncated estimators, in preparation (2024) .
[16] R. Zhao et al., Impact and mitigation of imaging systematics for DESI 2024 full shape analysis,
     in preparation (2024) .
[17] DESI Collaboration, B. Abareshi, J. Aguilar, S. Ahlen, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander et al.,
     Overview of the Instrumentation for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, AJ 164 (2022)
     207 [2205.10939].
[18] J.H. Silber, P. Fagrelius, K. Fanning, M. Schubnell, J.N. Aguilar, S. Ahlen et al., The robotic
     multiobject focal plane system of the dark energy spectroscopic instrument (DESI), The
     Astronomical Journal 165 (2022) 9.




                                               – 29 –
[19] A.D. Myers, J. Moustakas, S. Bailey, B.A. Weaver, A.P. Cooper, J.E. Forero-Romero et al.,
     The Target-selection Pipeline for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, AJ 165 (2023) 50
     [2208.08518].
[20] E.F. Schlafly, D. Kirkby, D.J. Schlegel, A.D. Myers, A. Raichoor, K. Dawson et al., Survey
     Operations for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, arXiv e-prints (2023)
     arXiv:2306.06309 [2306.06309].
[21] J. Guy, S. Bailey, A. Kremin, S. Alam, D.M. Alexander, C. Allende Prieto et al., The
     Spectroscopic Data Processing Pipeline for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, AJ 165
     (2023) 144 [2209.14482].
[22] C. Hahn, M.J. Wilson, O. Ruiz-Macias, S. Cole, D.H. Weinberg, J. Moustakas et al., DESI
     Bright Galaxy Survey: Final Target Selection, Design, and Validation, arXiv e-prints (2022)
     arXiv:2208.08512 [2208.08512].
[23] R. Zhou, B. Dey, J.A. Newman, D.J. Eisenstein, K. Dawson, S. Bailey et al., Target Selection
     and Validation of DESI Luminous Red Galaxies, AJ 165 (2023) 58 [2208.08515].
[24] E. Chaussidon, C. Yèche, N. Palanque-Delabrouille, D.M. Alexander, J. Yang, S. Ahlen et al.,
     Target Selection and Validation of DESI Quasars, ApJ 944 (2023) 107 [2208.08511].
[25] A. Raichoor, J. Moustakas, J.A. Newman, T. Karim, S. Ahlen, S. Alam et al., Target Selection
     and Validation of DESI Emission Line Galaxies, AJ 165 (2023) 126 [2208.08513].
[26] A. Dey, D.J. Schlegel, D. Lang, R. Blum, K. Burleigh, X. Fan et al., Overview of the DESI
     Legacy Imaging Surveys, AJ 157 (2019) 168 [1804.08657].
[27] Schlegel et al., in preparation (2024) .
[28] Raichoor et al., in preparation (2024) .
[29] J. Lasker, A.C. Rosell, A.D. Myers, A.J. Ross, D. Bianchi, M.M.S. Hanif et al., Production of
     Alternate Realizations of DESI Fiber Assignment for Unbiased Clustering Measurement in
     Data and Simulations, arXiv e-prints (2024) arXiv:2404.03006 [2404.03006].
[30] A. Krolewski et al., Impact and mitigation of spectroscopic systematics on DESI Y1 clustering,
     in preparation (2024) .
[31] D. Bianchi and W.J. Percival, Unbiased clustering estimation in the presence of missing
     observations, MNRAS 472 (2017) 1106 [1703.02070].
[32] K.M. Górski, E. Hivon, A.J. Banday, B.D. Wandelt, F.K. Hansen, M. Reinecke et al.,
     HEALPix: A Framework for High-Resolution Discretization and Fast Analysis of Data
     Distributed on the Sphere, ApJ 622 (2005) 759 [astro-ph/0409513].
[33] M. Rezaie et al., Local primordial non-Gaussianity from the large-scale clustering of
     photometric DESI luminous red galaxies, 2307.01753.
[34] E. Chaussidon et al., Angular clustering properties of the DESI QSO target selection using
     DR9 Legacy Imaging Surveys, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 509 (2021) 3904 [2108.03640].
[35] J.E. Bautista et al., The SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: Baryon
     Acoustic Oscillations at redshift of 0.72 with the DR14 Luminous Red Galaxy Sample,
     Astrophys. J. 863 (2018) 110 [1712.08064].
[36] U. Andrade, J. Mena-Fernández, H. Awan, A.J. Ross, S. Brieden, J. Pan et al., Validating the
     Galaxy and Quasar Catalog-Level Blinding Scheme for the DESI 2024 analysis, arXiv e-prints
     (2024) arXiv:2404.07282 [2404.07282].
[37] A. Rosado-Marin et al., Mitigating Imaging Systematics for DESI DR1 Emission Line Galaxies
     and Beyond, in preparation (2024) .




                                                – 30 –
[38] H. Kong et al., Removing Imaging Systematics from Galaxy Clustering Measurements with
     Obiwan : Application to the SDSS-IV extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey
     Emission Line Galaxy Sample, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 499 (2020) 3943 [2007.08992].
[39] H. Kong et al., Forward modeling fluctuations in the DESI LRG target sample using image
     simulations, in preparation (2024) .
[40] J. Yu et al., ELG Spectroscopic Systematics Analysis of the DESI Data Release 1, in
     preparation (2024) .
[41] A. de Mattia and V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, Integral constraints in spectroscopic surveys, JCAP 08
     (2019) 036 [1904.08851].
[42] A.J. Ross, L. Samushia, C. Howlett, W.J. Percival, A. Burden and M. Manera, The clustering
     of the SDSS DR7 main Galaxy sample – I. A 4 per cent distance measure at z = 0.15, Mon.
     Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 449 (2015) 835 [1409.3242].
[43] H.A. Feldman, N. Kaiser and J.A. Peacock, Power spectrum analysis of three-dimensional
     redshift surveys, Astrophys. J. 426 (1994) 23 [astro-ph/9304022].
[44] J. Moustakas et al., fastspecfit , in prep. (2024) [xxxx.xxxxx].
[45] J. Moustakas, D. Scholte, B. Dey and A. Khederlarian, “FastSpecFit: Fast spectral synthesis
     and emission-line fitting of DESI spectra.” Astrophysics Source Code Library, record
     ascl:2308.005, Aug., 2023.
[46] E.F. Schlafly, D. Kirkby, D.J. Schlegel, A.D. Myers, A. Raichoor, K. Dawson et al., Survey
     Operations for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument, AJ 166 (2023) 259 [2306.06309].




                                               – 31 –
