                                               MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)                                                Preprint 16 August 2024                Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0




                                               The Cosmic Dipole in the Quaia Sample of Quasars: A Bayesian Analysis

                                               Vasudev Mittal,1,2∗★ Oliver T. Oayda,2∗ † and Geraint F. Lewis2
                                               ∗ Joint first author
                                               1 Department of Physical Sciences, IISER Mohali, Knowledge City, Sector 81, SAS Nagar, Manauli PO 140306, Punjab, India
                                               2 Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics A28, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia




arXiv:2311.14938v2 [astro-ph.CO] 15 Aug 2024
                                               Accepted 2023 November 24. Received 2023 November 15; in original form 2023 October 17



                                               ABSTRACT
                                               We present a Bayesian analysis of the Quaia sample of 1.3 million quasars as a test of the cosmological principle. This principle
                                               postulates that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic on sufficiently large scales, forming the basis of prevailing cosmological
                                               models. However, recent analyses of quasar samples have found a matter dipole inconsistent with the inferred kinematic dipole
                                               of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), representing a tension with the expectations of the cosmological principle. Here,
                                               we explore various hypotheses for the distribution of quasars in Quaia, finding that the sample is influenced by selection effects
                                               with significant contamination near the galactic plane. After excising these regions, we find significant evidence that the Quaia
                                               quasar dipole is consistent with the CMB dipole, both in terms of the expected amplitude and direction. This result is in conflict
                                               with recent analyses, lending support to the cosmological principle and the interpretation that the observed dipole is due to our
                                               local departure from the Hubble flow.
                                               Key words: quasars: general – cosmology: observations – cosmology: theory – large-scale structure of Universe



                                               1 INTRODUCTION                                                                  the cosmological principle is an accurate description of the universe,
                                                                                                                               then the peculiar velocity inferred from this dipole should correspond
                                               A critical assumption in the contemporary cosmological framework
                                                                                                                               with vCMB .
                                               is that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic at the largest
                                               scales (Harrison 2000). This is the cosmological principle, and it
                                                                                                                                  This matter anisotropy is observed, but there is no clear consensus
                                               is for example taken as a starting point by the Friedmann-Lemaître-
                                                                                                                               on whether it is consistent with the cosmological principle or not.
                                               Robertson-Walker (FLRW) metric of spacetime and the Friedmann
                                                                                                                               However, the general trend is that the matter dipole studies – specif-
                                               equations describing cosmic evolution. Homogeneity and isotropy
                                                                                                                               ically with radio galaxies and quasars – find a dipole that aligns
                                               were initially raised to the level of an a priori principle by Milne
                                                                                                                               with the CMB dipole in direction, but is larger in magnitude (Peebles
                                               (1935) – but the question as to whether there is an a posteriori basis
                                                                                                                               2022; Kumar Aluri et al. 2023). This ‘dipole anisotropy problem’ thus
                                               remains. If such a basis cannot be found, then we must critically
                                                                                                                               represents an outstanding problem amongst cosmological probes. In-
                                               re-examine the support for prevailing cosmological models.
                                                                                                                               sofar that a consensus on this issue has not been reached, independent
                                                  The cosmological principle tacitly assumes the existence of a set
                                                                                                                               studies of matter dipoles with new catalogues of sources are key in
                                               of fundamental observers which reside in the ‘cosmic rest frame’
                                                                                                                               further understanding the nature of this anomaly; for example, does
                                               where the universe is maximally isotropic. This is supported by
                                                                                                                               it represents a shortcoming of our scientific understanding or an as
                                               the fact that the ‘cosmic microwave background’ (CMB) is remark-
                                                                                                                               of yet unresolved systematic issue?
                                               ably smooth with temperature anisotropies of order Δ𝑇/𝑇 ≈ 10 −5 .
                                               However, imprinted on these underlying small-scale fluctuations is
                                                                                                                                  With this in mind, in this work we present an analysis of the
                                               a dipole anisotropy of order Δ𝑇/𝑇 ≈ 10 −3 . This is conventionally
                                                                                                                               recently-released Quaia quasar catalogue (Storey-Fisher et al. 2023).
                                               explained by the Earth’s peculiar motion through the universe with a
                                                                                                                               At the highest magnitude limit, this catalogue contains 1 295 502
                                               speed of 369.82 ± 0.11 km s −1 towards (𝑙, 𝑏) = (264.◦ 021, 48.◦ 253)
                                                                                                                               sources. We examine the anisotropy in angular distribution of these
                                               in galactic coordinates (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020), which we
                                                                                                                               quasars over the sky, applying a Bayesian framework to compare the
                                               denote as vCMB for future reference. If this explanation (the kine-
                                                                                                                               inferred dipole to that of the CMB. The structure of this paper is
                                               matic interpretation of the CMB) is correct, then other cosmological
                                                                                                                               as follows. In Section 2, we present the background theory and an
                                               probes using all-sky surveys should show a similar anisotropy. Crit-
                                                                                                                               overview of the instant state of the literature, including current obser-
                                               ically, distributions of matter at sufficiently large distances – namely
                                                                                                                               vations of the cosmic dipole and an assessment of their consistency
                                               where local clustering effects are negligible – should exhibit a dipole
                                                                                                                               with the cosmological principle. The data under consideration in this
                                               anisotropy, which we call the ‘cosmic dipole’ or the ‘matter dipole’. If
                                                                                                                               study – the Quaia quasar catalogue – is presented in Section 3, and
                                                                                                                               our approach to analysing the sample is examined in Section 4. The
                                               ★ E-mail: vasudeviiser@gmail.com                                                results are presented in Section 5. We discuss our results and present
                                               † E-mail: ooay3125@uni.sydney.edu.au                                            our conclusions in Section 6.

                                               © 2023 The Authors
2      Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
2 BACKGROUND: NUMBER COUNT DIPOLE                                           the language of Bayesian statistics have been used less extensively,
                                                                            which we discuss below.
The cosmological principle’s key assumption of homogeneity and
                                                                               Turning away from the radio galaxy studies, Secrest et al. (2021)
isotropy can, and has been, tested. One critical family of tests involves
                                                                            showcased that the Ellis & Baldwin (1984) method can be used to
probing the distribution of matter in the Earth’s frame of reference;
                                                                            study the matter dipole in quasar samples. This study, taken together
these are the ‘matter dipole’ studies. If we assume the principle to be
                                                                            with the joint radio galaxy and quasar analysis in Secrest et al. (2022),
an accurate description of the universe, then the CMB’s temperature
                                                                            is perhaps one of the more significant challenges to the cosmological
dipole is interpreted to arise solely from the Earth’s peculiar motion.
                                                                            principle. Therein, the authors studied the dipole in the distribution
Moreover, the dipole-removed frame is the frame of ‘cosmic rest’
                                                                            of quasars from CatWISE2020 (Marocco et al. 2021) using a least
where the universe is perceived as maximally isotropic and homoge-
                                                                            squares estimator, finding that the amplitude was at least twice as
neous. Insofar that the Earth’s peculiar velocity imprints a Doppler
                                                                            large as expected (at a 4.9𝜎 level of statistical significance). A similar
shift on observed sources like radio galaxies, we should be able to
                                                                            conclusion with the same sample was reached in Kothari et al. (2022).
recover the magnitude and direction of this motion from the dipole
                                                                            Separately, Singal (2021) used a sample of 0.28 million quasars and
in matter distributions over the sky. Framed in this way, measur-
                                                                            also found a dipole magnitude in excess of the CMB expectation,
ing the consistency between the CMB-inferred and matter-inferred
                                                                            although the sample size there was about 5 times smaller than that
velocities is the linchpin of the matter dipole studies.
                                                                            of Secrest et al. (2021).
   To see this, consider an observer moving with velocity 𝑣 ≪ 𝑐
                                                                               As we touched on earlier, these analyses used frequentist statistics,
with respect to distant sources which are isotropic and homogeneous
                                                                            and the results are sensitive to the estimator chosen. However, a
in their own rest frame. As suggested in Ellis & Baldwin (1984), if
                                                                            Bayesian analysis of CatWISE2020 was performed by Dam et al.
within the observer’s passband the sources have a spectral energy
                                                                            (2023), in which Secrest et al. (2021)’s result of an anomalously
distribution with a power law dependence on frequency described
                                                                            large dipole was confirmed at a statistical significance of 5.7𝜎. Taken
by 𝑆 ∝ 𝜈 − 𝛼 , and the apparent flux density has a cumulative power
                                                                            together, these results lend evidence to the proposition that the quasar
law distribution 𝑁 (> 𝑆) ∝ 𝑆 − 𝑥 , then Doppler boosting and relativis-
                                                                            dipole is in tension with the kinematic dipole inferred from the CMB.
tic aberration will induce a dipole anisotropy in the distribution of
                                                                               On the basis of the foregoing, the literature interrogating the matter
sources in the observer’s frame. The isotropic frame of reference will
                                                                            dipole is by no means unanimous. That being said, these works do
be boosted by an amplitude
                                                                            not represent an exhaustive survey of what is possible; a suite of
                  𝑣
D = [2 + 𝑥(1 + 𝛼)] .                                                 (1)    other probes have been formulated, many of which are accounted
                  𝑐                                                         for in Kumar Aluri et al. (2023). Some of these include tests with
This is the famous ‘kinematic dipole’, and Ellis & Baldwin (1984)           Type Ia SNe (see e.g. Horstmann et al. 2022; Singal 2022; Sorrenti
made the rough estimate that a minimum of 𝑂 (105 ) sources would be         et al. 2022), analyses of bulk flows (see e.g. Watkins et al. 2023) and
needed to discern this dipole. The implicit assumption here is that the     direct probes of the FLRW metric with tests of spatial curvature (see
observer should survey the sky until a flux density above which there       e.g. Zhou & Li 2020). Recently, Oayda & Lewis (2023) proposed a
is no directional bias in the completeness of the survey. Additionally,     novel test involving a dipole in time dilation, as sources with intrinsic
𝑥 and 𝛼 are assumed to not be redshift-dependent, although there            time-scales are time dilated along the direction of the Earth’s motion.
has been some suggestion that this simplification should be revisited          Returning to quasars, if there is an outstanding tension between
(see e.g. Dalang & Bonvin 2022). Further, local inhomogeneities             the dipole inferred from quasars and that expected from the CMB,
introduce a clustering dipole, so for a genuine measurement of the          then closer scrutiny is warranted. Since the cosmological principle is
cosmic dipole a significant fraction of the sources need to be at high      a foundational assumption in the prevailing cosmological paradigm
redshifts (𝑧 ≈ 1; Tiwari & Nusser 2016). From equation (1), the net         (Harrison 2000), a challenge to it cannot be easily overlooked. In this
dipole anisotropy for a patch of sky in the direction n̂ will be            work, we present another analysis of the dipole in quasar distribu-
                                                                            tions. We tested the recently-released Quaia catalogue (Storey-Fisher
Δ𝑁                          v                                               et al. 2023), employing Bayesian inference to understand which
   = D · n̂ = [2 + 𝑥(1 + 𝛼)] · n̂.                                   (2)
 𝑁                          𝑐                                               model is best supported by the sample and whether the inferred
Various all-sky surveys of radio sources have been used to trace out        dipole is consistent with that of the CMB.
this dipole over the sky, and thus probe the cosmological principle.
We note that Kumar Aluri et al. (2023) deals with the genealogy of
these tests in greater detail, but none the less we recount some of the
                                                                            3 QUAIA CATALOGUE
salient results here.
   Blake & Wall (2002) initially found support for a kinematic dipole       The Quaia catalogue (Storey-Fisher et al. 2023) is principally taken
aligned with the CMB and possessing the expected amplitude. How-            from quasars observed by the Gaia satellite (Gaia Collaboration
ever, the immediate state of the literature is equivocal as to whether      et al. 2016), which were released in Gaia DR3 (Gaia Collaboration
or not the matter dipole is consistent with the CMB dipole. Many            et al. 2023a,b). The full sample of DR3 quasar candidates totals to
studies (see e.g. Singal 2011; Colin et al. 2017; Bengaly et al. 2018;      6 649 162 sources, which was the starting point for the authors.
Singal 2019; Siewert et al. 2021; Singal 2023; Wagenveld et al. 2023)          In constructing their catalogue, they first imposed that all Gaia
have reported dipole amplitudes that are in excess of the CMB ex-           quasars have a measurement of photometric magnitude in the 𝐺,
pectation, while the inferred dipole directions generally align with        𝐵𝑃 and 𝑅𝑃 bands. Additionally, the authors cross-matched each of
the CMB dipole (although notably Darling (2022) and Cheng et al.            the quasar candidates with those from the Wide-field Infrared Survey
(2023) find consistency with the CMB dipole for their chosen radio          Explorer (WISE; Wright et al. 2010), using the unWISE reprocessing
catalogues). We point out that in the foregoing works and amongst           to also provide photometric information in the 𝑊1 and 𝑊2 infrared
others, authors discussed the appropriate choice of dipole estimator        bands. To decontaminate their sample, the authors imposed proper
at length, including whether or not certain estimators incur a bias that    motion cuts, since quasars are anticipated to be sources well within
must be accounted for. To our knowledge, tests instead formulated in        the background, and a number of colour magnitude cuts. They finally

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                                                   The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia                     3
applied a 𝐺 < 20.5 magnitude cut, the result of which constitutes          4.1.2 Masking
their primary catalogue: the ‘Quaia high’ catalogue. Another cut of
                                                                           Storey-Fisher et al. (2023) noted that the selection function is po-
𝐺 < 20.0 created the ‘Quaia low’ catalogue, since the authors noted
                                                                           tentially poorly-modelled in the vicinity of the galactic plane. In
that deeper magnitudes sacrificed purity and measurement precision.
                                                                           making this judgment, they computed the fractional residuals be-
   One other issue is outstanding: selection effects. To mitigate these,
                                                                           tween a synthetic catalogue generated by randomly sampling over
the authors created a selection function to account for how some
                                                                           a sphere according to the selection function and the actual Quaia
sources are preferentially observed at different locations on the sky
                                                                           catalogue. Around the edge of the plane, the random synthetic cat-
due to dust extinction, stellar density and the peculiarities of Gaia’s
                                                                           alogue over-predicts the data; additionally, near the galactic centre,
scanning pattern. This information is encoded in four maps: a dust ex-
                                                                           the random catalogue seems to under-predict the data. We note that
tinction map; a stellar distribution map; a separate Large Magellanic
                                                                           in the bottom row of Fig. 1, which shows our smoothed map of the
Cloud and Small Magellanic Cloud stellar map; and, a map encoding
                                                                           Quaia low and Quaia high samples, there indeed appears to be an
Gaia’s scanning law and source crowding. This data is passed to a
                                                                           over-density near (𝑙, 𝑏) ≈ (0◦ , 30◦ ) as well as under-densities along
Gaussian process, producing a probability map: the selection func-
                                                                           the galactic plane from about 𝑙 = 120◦ to 𝑙 = 240◦ . This is in line
tion. The selection function describes how likely it is for sources to
                                                                           with the proposition made by the Quaia authors. For example, if
be included in the final catalogue depending on where they are on
                                                                           the galactic centre is under-predicted by the selection function, then
the sky. In other words, regions which are less dense on the basis
                                                                           𝑠𝑖 < 𝑠˜𝑖 where 𝑠˜𝑖 is some true value of the selection function. Thus,
of systematics like dust extinction will be associated with a lower
                                                                           in our smoothed maps which originate from scaled number counts,
probability, and regions which do not suffer from these effects have
                                                                           the 𝑖-th pixel has a number count 𝑁𝑖 /𝑠𝑖 > 𝑁𝑖 /𝑠˜𝑖 , manifesting as an
a probability closer to 1.
                                                                           over-density.
   A visualisation of the raw Quaia low and Quaia high catalogues
                                                                              In order to address this issue, we chose to mask the galactic plane
with number count densities can be seen in the top row of Fig. 1.
                                                                           with a series of increasingly conservative masks, as the Quaia authors
These maps, as well as subsequent ones, are displayed in galactic
                                                                           suspected may be necessary at Section 4.5 in Storey-Fisher et al.
coordinates. We show the selection function provided by the Quaia
                                                                           (2023). To be explicit, we examined the effect of |𝑏| < 10◦ , 20◦ , 30◦
authors for both catalogues in the middle row of Fig. 1. By visual in-
                                                                           and 40◦ galactic plane masks on the recovered signal in conjunction
spection, dust extinction appears to dominate the map, which explains
                                                                           with an unmasked catalogue. The 30◦ mask curtains much of the
the dearth of sources near the galactic plane in the raw catalogue. Fi-
                                                                           problematic regions, but it is still possible that at the edge of the
nally, we show smoothed maps in the bottom row of Fig. 1 for Quaia
                                                                           mask the issues at the galactic plane seep into the masked sample.
low and Quaia high. To generate the smoothed map, we first scaled
                                                                           Accordingly, in addition to testing with a 40◦ mask, we implemented
the catalogue according to the selection function such that the 𝑖-th
                                                                           a circular mask centred on (𝑙 ◦ , 𝑏 ◦ ) = (0, 0) and subtending a solid
pixel with number of sources 𝑁𝑖 (see Section 4.1.1 for information
                                                                           angle of 4 sr in concert with the 30◦ galactic plane mask. We denote
on how sources are binned) is scaled by 1/𝑠𝑖 , where 𝑠𝑖 is the value
                                                                           this as a 30∗ mask for future reference. The 40◦ mask is represented
of the selection function at that pixel. We then implemented a sliding
                                                                           by the solid black line overlaid on the bottom row of Fig. 1, and the
average; for each pixel, we selected pixels within 1 steradian and
                                                                           30∗ mask is represented by the dashed black line.
computed the mean density. These maps give a visual cue of a source
over-density near the galactic centre, as well as under-densities near
mid galactic longitudes along the galactic plane. Superimposed on          4.2 Dipole amplitude expectation
the maps are two masks we chose to use, which are explained in more
detail in Section 4.1.2.                                                   Since we are ultimately testing the kinematic interpretation of the
                                                                           CMB, we will need to compare the expected dipole amplitude given
                                                                           CMB-inferred motion and the actual recovered dipole from the Quaia
                                                                           sample. Conventionally, this amounts to using equation (1) with
                                                                           𝑣 = 𝑣 CMB ≈ 369 km s −1 . This also means that 𝑥 and 𝛼 must be
4 APPROACH                                                                 ascertained from the sample of galactic sources. Here, we instead
                                                                           use the actual source counts themselves – rather than their proxy
4.1 Catalogue processing
                                                                           𝑥 – and take the distribution of 𝛼 to find a distribution of dipole
4.1.1 Binning                                                              amplitudes D given 𝑣. This approach is detailed below.
In order to prepare the catalogue for analysis, the sky was divided
into equal-area pixels using the the pixelisation regime of HEALPix1       4.2.1 Spectral index
(Górski et al. 2005; Zonca et al. 2019) as incorporated in the Python
package healpy. 𝑁side = 64 – generating a total of 49 152 pixels –         As mentioned earlier, we assume that the 𝑖-th Quaia source follows
was chosen, since the selection maps created by the Quaia authors are      a flux power law such that 𝑆 𝜈 ∝ 𝜈 − 𝛼𝑖 . To find the spectral index 𝛼𝑖 ,
given at this resolution. The choice of 𝑁side depends upon the fact that   we compute the colour magnitude 𝑚 𝐺−𝐵𝑃 . Since Gaia magnitudes
for number count analysis, the uncertainty in number counts for each       are measured in the Vega system, we use the zero points (ZP) and
pixel due to shot noise should not be greater than the mean number         mean wavelengths of the 𝐺 and 𝐵𝑃 bands, as provided in (Riello
count for the catalogue. We then summed the number of sources              et al. 2021), to determine 𝛼𝑖 . Namely,
within each pixel using their recorded positions in right ascension        𝑚 𝜈 = −2.5 log10 𝑆 𝜈 + ZP                                            (3)
and declination. This gives a means by which changes in the source
density can be discerned as a function of sky position.                    such that
                                                                           𝑚 𝐺−𝐵𝑃 = 2.5(log10 𝑆 𝐵𝑃 − log10 𝑆𝐺 ) + ZP𝐺 − ZP 𝐵𝑃                   (4)
                                                                                        𝑘 − 𝑚 𝐺−𝐵𝑃
                                                                            =⇒ 𝛼𝑖 =                                                             (5)
1   https://healpix.sourceforge.io/                                                 2.5 log10 (𝜈 𝐵𝑃 /𝜈𝐺 )

                                                                                                                          MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
4          Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
             Quaia Low Quasar Catalogue, G < 20.0 (N = 755 850)                                   Quaia High Quasar Catalogue, G < 20.5 (N = 1 295 502)
             60°                                                                                   60°


     30°                                                                                    30°

               120°                60°          0°           300°      240°                          120°               60°          0°          300°       240°
0°                                                                                     0°


    -30°                                                                                   -30°


             -60°                                                                                  -60°


                         1.8                                 17.8   33.9                                        3                                30.2    57.4
                                   Number density per healpixel                                                         Number density per healpixel
                               Selection function model, G < 20.0                                                   Selection function model, G < 20.5
             60°                                                                                   60°


     30°                                                                                    30°

               120°                60°          0°           300°          240°                      120°               60°         0°           300°       240°
0°                                                                                     0°


    -30°                                                                                   -30°


             -60°                                                                                  -60°


                     0             0.25        0.5           0.75      1                                   0            0.25        0.5          0.75       1
                                           Probability                                                                          Probability
               Quaia Low Quasar Catalogue, G < 20.0 Smoothed                                        Quaia High Quasar Catalogue, G < 20.5 Smoothed
             60°                                                                                   60°


     30°                                                                                   30°

               120°                60°          0°           300°          240°                     120°               60°          0°           300°       240°
0°                                                                                    0°


    -30°                                                                                -30°


             -60°                                                                                 -60°


                    19.6                              23.1            25.3                               33.5                             40.4            45.1
                                   Number density per healpixel                                                        Number density per healpixel

Figure 1. Visualisation of the salient features of the two Quaia catalogues in galactic coordinates, with Quaia low in the left column and Quaia high in the right
column. Top row: Raw catalogue prior to any additional masking or processing. Note that the catalogue already has an absence of sources near the galactic plane,
shown in grey, primarily due to dust absorption. Middle row: The selection function provided for both the Quaia catalogues, with the colour scale indicating
the probability of source detection associated with each pixel due to factors like dust extinction. Bottom row: Both catalogues have been smoothed via a sliding
average over a 1 steradian scale after scaling according to the selection function. Deviations in source density along the galactic plane can be seen, with an
over-density at the galactic centre and an under-density at mid galactic longitudes. The solid and dashed lines indicate the 40◦ and 30∗ galactic plane masks
respectively.


where 𝑘 is ZP𝐺 − ZP 𝐵𝑃 and in the last line we used the assumption                  above. This yields Gaia fluxes in units of photoelectrons s −1 , though
that 𝑆 𝜈 ∝ 𝜈 − 𝛼𝑖 . Equation (5) yields a distribution of spectral indices          we note that these fluxes can also be found by matching each Quaia
for Quaia low and Quaia high, which we show in Fig. 2. The mean                     source with its entry in DR3 by using each entry’s Gaia DR3 source
value of 𝛼 is labelled there only for illustrative purposes; what is                identifier. To convert from these units into Jy, we apply the relevant
important, in our analysis, is the distribution itself.                             conversion factor 𝑐 𝜈 found in the Gaia documentation (European
                                                                                    Space Agency & Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium
                                                                                    2021). A histogram showing the resultant flux distribution is pre-
4.2.2 Source number counts                                                          sented in Fig. 3. Overlaid there in red is the integrated distribution,
To find the distribution of fluxes in the Quaia sample, we first convert            i.e. the number of sources above some limiting flux density 𝑁 (> 𝑆).
the 𝐺 magnitude into a Gaia flux using the zero points mentioned                       In the context of quasar studies, the approach used in describing

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                                                                     The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia                   5

                    ×104
                6
                           α distribution (low)                                                                                             Amplitude (low)
                           α distribution (high)                                                      600                                   Amplitude (high)
                5          ᾱ = 2.44 (low)                                                                                                  D̄ = 0.0080 (low)
                           ᾱ = 2.37 (high)                                                           500                                   D̄ = 0.0068 (high)
                4


 Number count                                                                           Probability
                                                                                                      400
                3
                                                                                                      300

                2                                                                                     200

                1                                                                                     100

                0                                                                                       0
                              1            2          3                     4                               0.004   0.006    0.008    0.010        0.012
                                  Spectral index α (G − BP )                                                                Amplitude D


                                                                                       Figure 4. Probability distribution for the dipole amplitude assuming 𝑣CMB .
Figure 2. Distribution of spectral indices 𝛼 in the Quaia low and Quaia
                                                                                       This follows from the analysis in Section 4.2.2 and was performed with both
high samples computed from 𝑚𝐺−𝐵𝑃 . Blue and orange are used to denote
                                                                                       the Quaia low and Quaia high samples.
Quaia low and Quaia high respectively. The mean spectral indices 𝛼¯ for each
catalogue are indicated by the vertical lines.



                                                                                       of the data, we instead work directly with the observed fluxes in
                                                                                       the 𝐺 band. When we observe a population of sources and their
                106                                     Flux count (low)               associated fluxes, we expect a number count enhancement in the
                                                        Flux count (high)              forward hemisphere and a diminution in the backwards hemisphere;
                105                                     Integrated count (high)        sources become brighter and fainter respectively, and they congregate
                                                                                       along the line of motion. The conceptual underpinning of Ellis &



 Number count
                104                                                                    Baldwin (1984) is that the observed source count power law 𝑆 − 𝑥 is
                                                                                       the resultant of these two effects. Thus, in order to find the expected
                103                                                                    dipole amplitude, the following method was used.

                102                                                                       (i) We computed the number of sources greater than some limiting
                                                                                       flux density 𝑆0 , denoted as 𝑛𝑖 .
                101                                                                       (ii) For the 𝑗-th source with measured flux 𝑆 𝑗 , a Doppler shift
                                                                                       was applied such that 𝑆 𝑗 → 𝑆 𝑗 𝛿1+𝛼 where 𝛿 = 𝛾(1 + 𝑣 cos 𝜃) and
                100                                                                    𝛾 is the Lorentz factor. This is the relationship between the observed
                                   10−4                 10−3                    10−2   and rest frame flux densities as described in Ellis & Baldwin (1984).
                                             G band flux (Jy)                             (iii) We then computed the number of boosted fluxes greater than
                                                                                       some limiting flux density and multiplied this sum by 𝛿2 , which
                                                                                       anticipates relativistic aberration. We denote this final value as 𝑛𝑏 .
Figure 3. Source number counts binned by 𝐺 band flux for both Quaia low
                                                                                          (iv) Combining the above, we then calculated the expected dipole
(blue) and Quaia high (orange). Overlaid in red is the integrated source count         amplitude as
above a limiting flux density for Quaia high, which of course includes sources
in Quaia low.
                                                                                         𝑛 − 𝑛𝑖
                                                                                       D= 𝑏     .                                                                (6)
                                                                                            𝑛𝑖

the source count distribution has been similar to that of radio galaxy                 Note that we have selected units where 𝑐 = 1, and if we take a
studies. Specifically, in determining the dipole amplitude, power law                  measurement along the line of motion – the direction of maximal
fits of the form 𝑆 −𝑥 to the integrated source counts have been used                   density enhancement – then 𝜃 = 0 so 𝛿 = 𝛾(1 + 𝑣). We also fixed 𝑆0
(see e.g. Secrest et al. 2021), as well as piece-wise straight line fits,              to be near the flux limit of the catalogue. For Quaia low, 𝐺 = 20.0
onto which a flux cut is imposed such that the data is constrained to the              corresponds to a flux of ≈ 3.27 × 10 −5 Jy in the 𝐺 band, so we
regime of one of those power laws (see e.g. Singal 2023). This traces                  took 𝑆0 = 3.3 × 10 −5 Jy. For Quaia high, 𝐺 = 20.5 corresponds to ≈
back to the original conceptual framing of Ellis & Baldwin (1984),                     2.06×10 −5 Jy, and so we used 𝑆0 = 2.1×10 −5 Jy. Then, substituting
which supposed that a radio galaxy population can be described by                      𝑣 = 𝑣 CMB into the above analysis and randomly sampling 𝛼 from
a power law. Yet, by inspection, a straight line fit to the integrated                 Fig. 2 50 000 times, we find a dipole described by the distributions
counts in Fig. 3 is not the best reflection of the actual data. In order               in Fig. 4 with mean amplitude D̄ ≈ 0.0080 for Quaia low and
to get a better hold of the non-linear nature (in logarithmic space)                   D̄ ≈ 0.0068 for Quaia high.

                                                                                                                                       MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
6      Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
4.3 Bayesian analysis                                                      has the strongest level of support, and as such what kind of model
                                                                           best accounts for the Quaia sample.
4.3.1 Bayes’s theorem
With the Quaia sample prepared for analysis, we now explore how the
                                                                           4.3.3 Nested sampling
framework of Bayesian statistics provides a natural language to test
competing hypotheses and understand the Quaia data. The specific           A key difficulty with Bayesian methods is that the marginal likelihood
models we consider are explained in Section 4.5, but for now, a            cannot usually be computed analytically, and is somewhat expensive
Bayesian approach to model comparison can be broken down into              to determine numerically. However, modern computational methods
two key steps or levels (Mackay 2003). At the first level of inference,    are well-adapted to this challenge, and provide efficient algorithms
a model’s parameters are optimised and the posterior distributions         which are easy to implement. In this work, we take advantage of the
for those parameters are recovered. This amounts to solving Bayes’s        Nested Sampling (NS) algorithm (Skilling 2004, 2006). The focus
theorem, where                                                             of NS is on first determining the marginal likelihood and then eval-
               L (D|𝚯, 𝑀)𝜋(𝚯|𝑀)                                            uating the posterior distributions for a model’s parameters as a ‘sub-
𝑃(𝚯|D, 𝑀) =                     .                                   (7)    sidiary element’ (Skilling 2004). In trying to evaluate the marginal
                    Z(D|𝑀)
                                                                           likelihood, which is an integral over all parameter space as men-
We have recast the notation of Bayes’s theorem in line with Speagle        tioned earlier, NS recasts the integral to be over the prior instead and
(2020) to better indicate what each term means in the context of           generates iso-likelihood contours or shells of increasing likelihood
model inference; namely, D refers to the data and 𝚯 refers to the set of   (Speagle 2020). This gives an effective means of evaluating Z and
parameters pertaining to model 𝑀. L, 𝜋 and Z refer to the likelihood,      an associated uncertainty, with the posterior distribution as a byprod-
prior and evidence or marginal likelihood functions respectively, and      uct. Here, we have used Dynesty2 (Koposov et al. 2023), a Python
𝑃 denotes the resulting posterior probability distribution.                package which implements the NS algorithm.

4.3.2 Evidence and the Bayes factor                                        4.4 Likelihood functions
At the first level, the marginal likelihood only represents a normal-      Armed with the methods of Bayesian analysis, the next step in our ap-
isation term. However, at the second level of inference, competing         proach is to construct likelihood functions L to be placed in Bayes’s
hypotheses or models are ranked using the Bayes factor, which is the       theorem at equation (7). There are essentially two approaches that
ratio of the marginal likelihoods for each model. Specifically, if we      we can apply; these each test the same underlying assumption, but
wish to determine the relative levels of support for models 𝑀1 and         are framed in slightly different ways. We describe each of these in a
𝑀2 , we may compute                                                        model-invariant manner, eluding to how they would be altered to fit
ln 𝐵12 = ln Z1 − ln Z2                                              (8)    a particular hypothesis along the way.

where 𝐵 denotes the Bayes factor. It is advantageous to work with
natural logarithms since the actual value of the marginal likelihood       4.4.1 Poissonian statistics
is generally very small. In this work, any quoted marginal likelihood      In the first approach, the binning process referenced in Section 4.1.1
or Bayes factor is a natural logarithm. The interpretation of the level    is analogous to a Poisson point process, and variations in number
of support depends on the value of the Bayes factor. In this example,      density (occupancy) across each pixel can ideally be explained by
ln 𝐵12 > 0 means that 𝑀1 is preferred over 𝑀2 , with larger values         two factors: shot noise and an intrinsic signal. Shot noise necessitates
indicating more support for 𝑀1 . For reference, Kass & Raftery (1995)      that we associate each pixel with a Poisson distribution, i.e. the
provide a qualitative description depending on the value of the Bayes      occupancy for a given pixel is a random variate drawn from a Poisson
factor, although we stress that this is not meant to be definitive. We     distribution. The intrinsic signal could be a dipole, where sources in
also note that the table in their work has units of 2 ln 𝐵. We present     the forward hemisphere are associated with higher number densities
our values as ln 𝐵, so the reader will need to keep the factor of two      than sources in the backward hemisphere. This modifies the rate
in mind when comparing our values to the ranges appearing in Kass          parameter of the Poisson distribution describing a pixel’s number
& Raftery (1995).                                                          density.
   Since the∫ marginal likelihood is an integral over all parameter           In light of this, the probability 𝑃 of observing 𝑁𝑖 sources in pixel
space Z = Ω L (𝚯) × 𝜋(𝚯) 𝑑𝚯, models with excessive parameters              𝑖 can be written as
              𝚯
which waste parameter space are intrinsically disfavoured. To a rough
approximation, the marginal likelihood can be written as                                 𝜆 𝑁𝑖 𝑒 −𝜆𝑖
                                                                           𝑃(𝑁𝑖 | p̂i ) = 𝑖                                                   (10)
                                                                                            𝑁𝑖 !
             Δ𝚯
Z ≈ L (𝚯MP ) 0                                                      (9)    where p̂i is a unit vector pointing towards the 𝑖-th pixel and 𝜆𝑖 is the
            Δ 𝚯
                                                                           rate parameter for the 𝑖-th pixel. The expected number of occupants
following the argument in Mackay (2003). L (𝚯MP ) is the value
                                                                           in a pixel is just the rate parameter: 𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝜆𝑖 .
of the likelihood function at the most optimal set of parameters,
                                                                              In practice, as explained in Section 3, Quaia is packaged with a
where Δ𝚯/Δ0 𝚯 can be analogised as the ratio of the peak in the
                                                                           selection function that ascribes each pixel with a probability. On top
likelihood function to the width of the prior distribution. This term
                                                                           of statistical fluctuations and variations due to the underlying signal,
is called the Occam factor, and it generally penalises models which
                                                                           pixels might have source under-densities because of factors like ex-
squander parameter space and only have explanatory power (i.e. a
                                                                           tinction from dust in the galactic plane. This needs to be accounted
high likelihood) for a comparatively small region of parameter space.
                                                                           for insofar that we are examining the assumption of homogeneity and
   For each of our hypotheses or models, we compute the marginal
likelihoods and Bayes factors, using these metrics to rank them. The
result of this process is a quantitative evaluation of which hypothesis    2   https://pypi.org/project/dynesty/

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                                                       The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia                         7
isotropy. We can do this through attenuating the rate parameter by          This acts as the null hypothesis for our study. In order to compute
the value of the selection function 𝑠𝑖 (a probability between 0 and 1)      the likelihood function in the Poissonian case, the rate parameter 𝜆𝑖
at the 𝑖-th pixel. Explicitly, this means that                              of equation (11) is replaced with 𝑁,¯ whereas in the point-by-point
                                                                            case 𝑓𝑖 is set to 1. These are then substituted into equations (12)
                  (𝜆 𝑖 × 𝑠𝑖 ) 𝑁𝑖 𝑒 −𝜆𝑖 ×𝑠𝑖
𝑃(𝑁𝑖 | p̂i ) =                                                      (11)    and (14) respectively. Thus, 𝚯Pois. = { 𝑁¯ } in the Poissonian case and
                            𝑁𝑖 !                                            𝚯P×P = ∅ in the point-by-point case.
such that 𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝜆 𝑖 × 𝑠𝑖 .
   By associating each pixel on the sky with a probability determined
from Poisson distributions, the likelihood function can be written as       4.5.2 𝑀1 : Dipole
the product of all probabilities. As a logarithm, this becomes              As an alternative to the null hypothesis, we introduce the vector D,
         ∑︁
         𝑛pix.                                                              which points in the direction of the dipole signal and has amplitude
ln L =           ln 𝑃(𝑁𝑖 | 𝚯)                                       (12)    equal to the magnitude of the dipole (see e.g. equation (1)). The an-
         𝑖=1                                                                ticipated number count is then described by the sum of the monopole
for total number of pixels 𝑛pix. .                                          and dipole signals (see e.g. Dam et al. 2023) such that
                                                                            𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝑁¯ + 𝑁¯ (D · p̂i ) = 𝑁¯ (1 + D cos 𝜃 𝑖 )                  (16)
4.4.2 Point-by-point analysis                                               where 𝜃 𝑖 is the angle between the dipole direction and the 𝑖-th pixel
Turning to the second approach, we are not restricted to our choice         vector, and D is the magnitude of the dipole.
of Poissonian statistics. We can see this by examining each source             Here, Equation (16) is the rate parameter 𝜆𝑖 that is inserted
individually such that the likelihood function is now the product of        into equation (11) where Poissonian statistics is used, and 𝑓𝑖 =
all points, not the product of all pixels. Thus, we term this the ‘point-   1 + D cos 𝜃 𝑖 in the point-by-point analysis for the purposes of equa-
by-point’ approach. However, the sky is still discretised to simplify       tion (13). Evidently, the parameter spaces are given by 𝚯Pois. =
the calculation; points within a certain pixel are assumed to have the      {¯𝑁, D, 𝑙, 𝑏} and 𝚯P×P = {D, 𝑙, 𝑏}, where 𝑙 and 𝑏 characterise the
same probability. This approach was adopted by Conn et al. (2011,           direction of the dipole in galactic coordinates.
2012) in their distance determinations using the tip of the red giant
branch for sparsely populated systems.
                                                                            4.5.3 𝑀2 : Double dipole
   Let us introduce the function 𝑓𝑖 , which describes the anticipated
signal at pixel 𝑖. This is a model-dependent term, the functional           The presence of an over-density region just above the galactic center
form of which we leave for Section 4.5. If we examine each source           and other under-densities along the galactic plane in both Quaia low
individually and not as a member of a pixel, then the distribution          and Quaia high, which we described in Section 4.1.2, hints towards
associating points with a probability depending on their position           the fact that the net dipole in Quaia might be a combination of two
on the sky takes the form 𝑓𝑖 , at least up to a normalising constant.       dipoles. The net dipole modulation is then the multiplication of two
Thus, the contribution to the likelihood function at the 𝑖-th pixel is      individual dipoles, and the expected number density for the 𝑖-th pixel
∝ (𝑠𝑖 × 𝑓𝑖 ) 𝑁𝑖 , since we are taking the product over all points 𝑁𝑖 in     is given by
the pixel.
   To normalise this distribution for the 𝑖-th pixel (denoted as 𝑓ˆ𝑖        𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝑁¯ [(1 + D1 · p̂i ) × (1 + D2 · p̂i )]                    (17)
below), which is critical after application of a mask and selection         This is used as a rate parameter for equation (11) where Poissonian
map, we sum over all unmasked pixels such that                              statistics is used, and 𝑓𝑖 = (1 + D1 · p̂i ) × (1 + D2 · p̂i ) in the point-by-
        𝑠 𝑖 × 𝑓𝑖                                                            point case for equation (13). Thus, our parameter space is 𝚯Pois. =
𝑓ˆ𝑖 = Í𝑛pix.        .                                               (13)      ¯ D1 , 𝑙1 , 𝑏 1 , D2 , 𝑙2 , 𝑏 2 } and 𝚯P×P = {D1 , 𝑙1 , 𝑏 1 , D2 , 𝑙2 , 𝑏 2 }.
                                                                            { 𝑁,
       𝑖=1 𝑖
             𝑠 × 𝑓𝑖
                                                                               The assumption here is that the two dipoles were generated at
Thus, the natural logarithm of the likelihood function can be written       different times and due to different factors. So, the observer’s frame
as                                                                          was already anisotropic due to one dipole at the genesis of the second
         ∑︁
         𝑛pix.                                                              dipole, and it makes sense to apply an extra modulation on top of an
ln L =           𝑁𝑖 ln 𝑓ˆ𝑖 .                                        (14)    already modulated sky. If this was not the case and the genesis time
         𝑖=1                                                                were the same for the two, then the net motion should be in a direction
In principle, both the Poissonian and point-by-point models should          that is in between the two dipoles and hence only a single dipole
give consistent results, since both represent slightly different ap-        would be observed. Even if such a scenario seems unlikely, it is worth
proaches to describe the same underlying effect. We confirm this in         examining as the marginal likelihood will balance the explanatory
our results at Section 5.                                                   power of this model and its complexity, potentially revealing deeper
                                                                            insight into the nature of the Quaia sample.

4.5 Hypotheses under consideration
                                                                            4.5.4 𝑀3 : Quadrupole
4.5.1 𝑀0 : Monopole (Null)
                                                                            For the sake of completeness, we also test for an underlying
Suppose that the distribution of sources is in fact homogeneous and         quadrupole signal. We postulate that this signal is ∝ cos2 𝜃, such
isotropic in the observer’s frame. Then a monopole signal is antici-        that the expected number density for the 𝑖-th pixel is
pated, where pixels are expected to have some mean number density
𝑁¯ irrespective of the location of the pixel on the sky. Expressed          𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝑁¯ (1 + D̃ cos2 𝜃 𝑖 ).                                    (18)
differently, the expected number density is
                                                                            Our parameter spaces are 𝚯Pois. = { ¯ 𝑁, D̃, 𝑙, 𝑏}, where the tilde on
                 ¯
𝐸 [𝑁𝑖 ( p̂i )] = 𝑁.                                                 (15)    the signal magnitude suggests the fact that the quadrupole amplitude

                                                                                                                                 MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
8      Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
is not necessarily the same as the foregoing dipole models. For the                         Model (Point-by-point)           ln 𝐵𝑖0
point-by-point case, 𝚯P×P = { D̃, 𝑙, 𝑏}. The expected form of this                          𝑀0 (Null)                               —
signal is inserted into equations (11) and (13), as already described                       𝑀1 (Dipole)                           14.4
above. It is worth noting that the quadrupole model is in fact a                            𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                    18.9
                                                                                            𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                        6.2
special case for the double dipole model with D1 · p̂i = −D2 · p̂i in
                                                                                            𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              12.8
equation (17).                                                                              𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               14.0
                                                                                            𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 15.5
4.5.5 𝑀4 : Dipole pointing towards the kinematic dipole                    Table 1. Table of Bayes factors by model for a 30◦ mask with the Quaia low
                                                                           sample and using the point-by-point approach. The highlighted cell represents
In order to verify the kinematic interpretation of the cosmic dipole,      the model with the highest Bayes factor, indicating it has the strongest level
it is worth fixing certain parameters to their value as determined         of support.
from the CMB dipole while varying the others. Doing so is advanta-
geous, as the marginal likelihood for a kinematic hypothesis can be
compared to models where such an interpretation is not assumed.            cross-talk between the two signals in the posterior distribution at
   Here, we fix the model’s dipole to the direction of the CMB dipole,     opposite hemispheres. In a similar sense, for the quadrupole model
namely (𝑙, 𝑏) = (264.◦ 0.21, 48.◦ 253), and leave the amplitude as a       we took 𝜙 ∼ [𝜋/2, 3𝜋/2] and 𝜃 ∼ cos −1 (1 − 2𝑢), since there is a
free parameter. The expectation of the number density is identical         degenerate solution in the other hemisphere.
to equation (16) except with 𝜃 fixed to 𝜃 CMB , and so the parameters         • For the mean number density or monopole signal 𝑁,  ¯ we took
pertaining to each model are 𝚯Pois. = { 𝑁,¯ D} and 𝚯P×P = {D}.              ¯                                 ¯
                                                                           𝑁 ∼ U [0, 30] for Quaia low and 𝑁 ∼ U [0, 50] for Quaia high.


4.5.6 𝑀5 : Dipole fixed by the kinematic dipole velocity
                                                                           5 RESULTS
Another test involves fixing the magnitude of the dipole to the CMB
value while allowing its direction to vary. The dipole magnitude is        With our models outlined, we now turn to the recovered parameters
fixed to the mean values of D calculated using the method described        and marginal likelihoods of each model. Since we are chiefly inter-
in 4.2.2. More explicitly, D = 0.0080 for Quaia low and D = 0.0068         ested in this comparative assessment, and not the actual value of the
for Quaia high. Here, equation (16) applies with D fixed, and so the       evidence itself, an easy way to represent the data is by computing the
parameters for each model are 𝚯Pois. = { ¯𝑁, 𝑙, 𝑏} and 𝚯P×P = {𝑙, 𝑏}.      Bayes factor for model 𝑀𝑖 with respect to the null hypothesis 𝑀0 :
                                                                           this is ln 𝐵𝑖0 = ln Z𝑖 − ln Z0 . All models are being assessed with
                                                                           a common benchmark – the null hypothesis – which allows a quick
4.5.7 𝑀6 : CMB motion                                                      identification of the strongest hypothesis. Thus, the relative level of
                                                                           support for one hypothesis (𝑀𝑖 ) over another hypothesis (𝑀 𝑗 ) is
Finally, we may totally align this model’s dipole in both direction
                                                                           simply computed by
and magnitude with the CMB kinematic dipole and compute the
marginal likelihood. This gives a metric by which the veracity of          ln 𝐵𝑖 𝑗 = ln Z𝑖 − ln Z 𝑗 = (ln Z𝑖 − ln Z0 ) − (ln Z 𝑗 − ln Z0 )          (19)
CMB-aligned motion in the Quaia sample compares to an inferred                                       = ln 𝐵𝑖0 − ln 𝐵 𝑗0 .                           (20)
direction after parameter optimisation. The parameters in this case
are 𝚯Pois. = { 𝑁¯ } and 𝚯P×P = ∅.                                          One point to keep in mind, however, is that since our Poissonian
                                                                           and point-by-point approaches of Section 4.4 use different likelihood
                                                                           functions, the actual value of Z for a given model is very differ-
4.6 Choice of priors                                                       ent across the two approaches. What should not change appreciably
As a final step, we determine the prior functions 𝜋(𝚯|𝑀) for equation      between them, as we show below, is the Bayes factor.
(7), which is needed for each model’s parameters. The choice of prior         Since our experiment has many variations – namely different mod-
represents our belief about what values the parameters are likely to       els, masks, approaches and catalogues – we generated a considerable
take before knowledge of the data.                                         number of marginal likelihoods and hence Bayes factors, with the
                                                                           latter being tabulated in Appendix A. There, the highlighted cells
   • We adopted a broad prior for the dipole amplitude 𝐷, as well as       draw attention to the model with the highest Bayes factor for a given
the double dipole amplitudes 𝐷 1 , 𝐷 2 , choosing them from a uniform      galactic mask. These are too voluminous to give in their entirety
distribution 𝐷, 𝐷 1 , 𝐷 2 ∼ U [0, 1]. This choice was motivated by         here. Certain salient results, however, are referenced periodically in
the significant uncertainty in the magnitude of the dipole across a        the following text to substantiate our findings.
diverse spectrum of independent tests (see e.g. Abdalla et al. 2022;
Kumar Aluri et al. 2023). In contrast, we sampled the quadrupole
amplitude according to 𝐷˜ ∼ U [−1, 0], since in testing we found that      5.1 Quaia low
the positive amplitude solution restricted the solution to a poorer fit
                                                                           5.1.1 Low galactic masks: |𝑏| < 10◦ , 20◦ , 30◦
at the north galactic pole.
   • For the direction parameters, in internal calculations we work in     In this masking regime, the prevailing model is the double dipole
equatorial coordinates but convert the posterior afterwards to galactic    (𝑀2 ). This is exemplified by the Bayes factors in in Table A1 and
coordinates for presentation. We denote these equatorial coordinates       Table A2 for the point-by-point and Poissonian approaches respec-
(𝜙, 𝜃) for right ascension 𝜙 in radians and co-declination 𝜃 in radians.   tively. Note here that the conclusions – that is, the level of support
For the dipole direction, we uniformly sampled over the surface of         for each model – are the same across both approaches.
a unit sphere, and so 𝜙 ∼ U [0, 2𝜋] and 𝜃 ∼ cos −1 (1 − 2𝑢) where             As an example, we placed the Bayes factors for a 30◦ mask with
𝑢 ∼ U [0, 1]. For the double dipole directions, we took 𝜙1 , 𝜙2 ∼          Quaia low and the point-by-point method in Table 1. The level of
[3𝜋/2, 5𝜋/2], [𝜋/2, 3𝜋/2] and 𝜃 1 , 𝜃 2 ∼ cos −1 (1 − 2𝑢) to prevent       support of the double dipole (𝑀2 ) over the dipole (𝑀1 ) is ln 𝐵21 =

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                                                         The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia                     9
                 Model (Point-by-point)           ln 𝐵𝑖0                            For lower galactic mask angles, the double dipole model is consis-
                 𝑀0 (Null)                               —                       tently favoured over the dipole model, with the difference in Bayes
                 𝑀1 (Dipole)                           49.6                      factors increasing as the galactic mask angle 𝑏 decreases.
                 𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                    49.6
                 𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                        1.6
                 𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              29.2
                                                                                 5.2.2 High galactic mask: |𝑏| < 40◦
                 𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               35.3
                 𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 28.7                      Unlike the Quaia low sample, 𝑀4 (kinematic direction) is the pre-
Table 2. Table of Bayes factors by model for a 30◦ mask with the Quaia high      vailing explanation with a |𝑏| < 40◦ galactic plane mask on Quaia
sample and using the point-by-point approach. The highlighted cell represents    high. This is consistent across both the point-by-point and Poisso-
the model with the highest Bayes factor, indicating it has the strongest level   nian approaches, as expected. This being said, the Bayes factors (see
of support.                                                                      Tables A3 and A4) for all models except 𝑀3 and 𝑀0 are comparable,
                                                                                 with the difference between the lowest and highest Bayes factor being
                                                                                 ≈ 1 log unit. This suggests that each model is on a similar footing
4.5, which represents strong support. The model with the second-                 in terms of explanatory power; one model does not totally dominate
highest Bayes factor in Table 1 – the kinematic dipole 𝑀6 – yields               over the others. At best, the largest Bayes factor ln 𝐵41 ≈ 1 suggests
a relative Bayes factor of ln 𝐵26 = 3.4. For the |𝑏| < 30◦ mask, this            some positive support for 𝑀4 over the double dipole (𝑀1 ).
is the closest a competing model comes to out-competing the double                  Interestingly, with the 30∗ mask, the dipole (𝑀1 ) is the favoured
dipole. As we move towards less conservative galactic plane masks,               hypothesis, and the kinematic dipole (𝑀6 ) offers the next-best ex-
this difference in general increases. For |𝑏| < 10◦ , 20◦ , the dipole           planation of the data. The difference between the Bayes factor for
model (𝑀1 ) has the second-highest Bayes factor as seen in Tables                𝑀1 and the other models is in general higher than the differences
A1 and A2, followed by the kinematic velocity model (𝑀5 ).                       between 𝑀4 and the other hypotheses with the 40◦ mask, suggesting
                                                                                 the dipole 𝑀1 is more dominant in this regime.

5.1.2 High galactic mask: |𝑏| < 40◦ and 30∗
For the |𝑏| < 40◦ galactic plane mask, no longer is the double dipole            6 DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS
the prevailing model. Instead, the kinematic dipole 𝑀6 has the highest
Bayes factor, followed by 𝑀5 (kinematic velocity) and 𝑀4 (kinematic              6.1 Prevailing double dipole as the effect of over-densities
direction). Recall that model 𝑀6 assumes a dipole totally aligned with           We turn first to explaining the dominance of the double dipole at
the CMB dipole and possessing the same amplitude. The dominance                  low galactic masks as opposed to the other hypotheses, which is
of model 𝑀6 is consistent across both Poissonian and point-by-point              observed in both Quaia low and Quaia high. This was outlined in
approaches, as expected.                                                         Sections 5.1.1 and 5.2.1. In essence, what must be explained is why
    Critically, this sheds light on the fact that a transition is occurring      the double dipole – despite having a more significant penalty from
from the |𝑏| < 30◦ mask to the |𝑏| < 40◦ mask; the support for the               the Occam factor for its complexity – can provide a comparatively
fitted hypotheses 𝑀1 –𝑀3 dwindles substantially, while the kinematic             better explanation of the data than the other models.
hypotheses 𝑀4 –𝑀6 , which generally have less parameters, gain com-                 To better see how the model is fitting the data, we extracted the
paratively higher Bayes factors. This is also evinced by the 30∗ mask,           single best fit values (highest marginal probability) for the double
which incorporates both the |𝑏| < 30◦ and a 4 sr circular mask cen-              dipole with a 30◦ mask and computed the signal term 𝑓𝑖 = (1 +
tred on (𝑙, 𝑏) = (0◦ , 0◦ ). The double dipole 𝑀2 and kinematic dipole           D1 · p̂i ) × (1 + D2 · p̂i ). We did this for all pixels over the sky
𝑀6 have comparable Bayes factors in this regime, and so the 30∗                  and show the resultant map in Fig. 5. Compare this map with the
mask must represent an intermediate stage of this transition.                    smoothed versions shows in the bottom row of Fig. 1, noting the
                                                                                 dashed lines which indicate the 30∗ mask we applied. With this in
                                                                                 mind, the high value of the Bayes factors likely arise because of
5.2 Quaia high                                                                   the over-density at (𝑙, 𝑏) ≈ (0◦ , 30◦ ) and the under-densities along
                                                                                 the galactic plane from about 𝑙 = 120◦ to 𝑙 = 240◦ ; this cannot
5.2.1 Low galactic masks: |𝑏| < 10◦ , 20◦ , 30◦
                                                                                 be adequately captured by for instance the dipole 𝑀1 , but is better
Similar to Quaia low, the prevailing model is the double dipole (𝑀2 ).           captured by the double dipole 𝑀2 . This applies both for Quaia low
This is again exemplified by the Bayes factors in Tables A3 and A4               and Quaia high. Considering the coverage of the |𝑏| < 30◦ mask, it is
for the point-by-point and Poissonian approaches respectively. The               probable that this angle and those below it are not able to sufficiently
level of support is the same across these approaches.                            remove the region of over-density.
   The Bayes factors for the 30◦ mask with the point-by-point method                We therefore are of the view that systematic effects arising from
are reproduced in Table 2 for reference. Curiously, there is equal               the Quaia selection function impact our analysis. These systematic
support for both the double dipole (𝑀2 ) and the dipole (𝑀1 ) with               effects – whether arising from inadequate consideration of dust ex-
ln 𝐵21 = 0, although for the Poissonian approach the Bayes factor                tinction effects, stellar contaminants, etc. – likely contribute to over-
for 𝑀2 is slightly higher than 𝑀1 (see Tables A3 and A4). This                   dense regions near the galactic centre, which give spurious fits as far
difference, however, does not change the interpretation significantly            as probing the distribution of distant quasars is concerned. We can
since it at best suggests a marginal level of support for 𝑀2 over 𝑀1 .           better understand the effect of this dubious over-density by examin-
Further, the model with the third-highest Bayes factor in Table 2 –              ing how the direction and amplitude of the recovered dipole of model
the kinematic velocity model 𝑀5 – yields a relative Bayes factor                 𝑀1 changes with galactic mask angle. This is illustrated in Fig. 6.
of ln 𝐵25 = 14.3. This suggests overwhelming support for both the                Looking at the top pane (Quaia low), as the region of over-density
double dipole and dipole models at |𝑏| < 30◦ mask over the other                 near the galactic centre is progressively masked out with increasing
competing explanations.                                                          galactic latitude 𝑏, the recovered dipole direction shifts towards the

                                                                                                                                MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
10           Mittal, Oayda & Lewis

                60°                                                                                  60°

      30°                                                                                 30°

            150° 120°     90°   60°   30°   0°   330° 300° 270° 240° 210°                        150° 120° 90°     60°   30°     0°    330° 300° 270° 240° 210°
 0°                                                                                     0°

                                                                                                                               |b| < 0.0◦               |b| < 30.0◦
  -30°                                                                                   -30°
                                                                                                                                            ◦
                                                                                                                               |b| < 10.0               |b| < 40.0◦
                                                                                                                                            ◦           CMB dipole
               -60°                                                                                 -60°                       |b| < 20.0


                  0.955                                        1.01                          Amplitude 𝐷 (×103 )     37 −4
                                                                                                                        +4     34 −4
                                                                                                                                  +4    25 −5
                                                                                                                                           +5   17 −6
                                                                                                                                                   +6     11 −5
                                                                                                                                                             +6       8
                      Signal fi = (1 + D1 · p̂i) × (1 + D2 · p̂i)

                60°                                                                                  60°

      30°                                                                                 30°

            150° 120°     90°   60°   30°   0°   330° 300° 270° 240° 210°                        150° 120° 90°     60°   30°     0°    330° 300° 270° 240° 210°
 0°                                                                                     0°

                                                                                                                               |b| < 0.0◦               |b| < 30.0◦
  -30°                                                                                   -30°
                                                                                                                                            ◦
                                                                                                                               |b| < 10.0               |b| < 40.0◦
                                                                                                                                            ◦           CMB dipole
               -60°                                                                                 -60°                       |b| < 20.0


                      0.971                                    1.02                          Amplitude 𝐷 (×103 )    48 −3
                                                                                                                       +4      43 −3
                                                                                                                                  +3    32 −4
                                                                                                                                           +4   20 −4
                                                                                                                                                   +4     12 −3
                                                                                                                                                             +4   7
                       Signal fi = (1 + D1 · p̂i) × (1 + D2 · p̂i)
                                                                                       Figure 6. Projection of the posterior distribution for recovered dipole direction
                                                                                       (using the Poissonian likelihood) onto a Mollweide projection. The graticules
Figure 5. Reconstructed signal using the best fit parameters for model 𝑀2              are in galactic coordinates, and the contours give intervals of 11.8%, 39.4%
(double dipole) tested on a 30◦ mask. The functional form of this signal is            and 67.5% of posterior mass, equivalent to 0.5𝜎, 1𝜎 and 1.5𝜎 for a 2D
as explained in Section 4.5.3. By visual inspection, the nature of this signal         Gaussian. The different colours correspond to different galactic plane cuts
is similar to the pattern of over-densities and under-densities shown in the           applied, as indicated by the legend. Amplitudes of the recovered dipole (×103 )
bottom row of Fig. 1, since it is this pattern that the model is trying to fit. Top:   are also tabulated beneath the plots with the same colour code as the sky
Fit with Quaia low (𝐺 < 20.0). Bottom: Fit with Quaia high (𝐺 < 20.5).                 projections. The listed uncertainties give an interval containing 95% of the
                                                                                       posterior mass, equivalent to 2𝜎 for a 1D Gaussian. The key point is that
                                                                                       as increasingly conservative masks are used, the recovered and CMB dipoles
                                                                                       more closely align for Quaia low. Top: Quaia low. Bottom: Quaia high.
CMB dipole. For a 40◦ galactic plane mask (red contours), the recov-
ered direction is consistent with the CMB direction within ≈ 0.5𝜎,
although we note that at this stage the uncertainty in the fitted pa-                  they have equivalent explanatory power. This is likely because the 30∗
rameters has drastically increased because more than half of the sky                   mask is being influenced by other over-densities and under-densities,
has been masked. With respect to the dipole amplitudes, these are                      which are better filtered out by the 40◦ mask. We therefore find that
shown for each mask in the single row below the Quaia low sky                          the 40◦ mask is most apt for genuinely interpreting the cosmic dipole
projection of Fig. 6. As the over-dense region is masked out, the                      in Quaia low.
recovered dipole amplitude approaches the CMB dipole amplitude.                           Quaia high cannot be viewed with the same interpretation. Looking
Interestingly, for a 40◦ galactic plane mask, the recovered dipole am-                 at the bottom pane of Fig. 6, the recovered dipole for Quaia high drifts
plitude 𝐷 × 103 ≈ 11 −5+6 is consistent with the CMB dipole amplitude
                                                                                       away from the CMB dipole and towards (𝑙, 𝑏) ≈ (330◦ , 60◦ ) with
       3
𝐷 ×10 ≈ 8 given the 2𝜎 uncertainties, which sheds light on why 𝑀6                      high galactic masks, which it reaches by |𝑏| < 40◦ . Moreover, the
is the preferred model in this regime. We interpret this as signifying                 CMB and inferred dipole amplitudes do not agree with each other
that the spurious over-densities are filtered out with the 40◦ mask,                   within 2𝜎, even with the 40◦ mask. Looking at the Bayes factors, the
and so the prevailing model is simply a dipole consistent with the                     favoured hypothesis with a 40◦ mask is the kinematic direction (𝑀4 ),
CMB dipole.                                                                            but only marginally; the next-best model, 𝑀1 , is only 0.2 to 0.3 log
   We also attempted to remove this over-dense region – while max-                     units behind. This is only a superficial, ‘bare mention’ of support for
imising the final number of sources analysed – by imposing a 4 sr                      𝑀4 over 𝑀1 (Kass & Raftery 1995). We therefore form the view that,
circular mask centered at (𝑙, 𝑏) = (0◦ , 0◦ ) on top of the 30◦ mask.                  while a dipole is being inferred in the sample, its parameters cannot
This mask has been labelled as 30∗ in Tables A1–A4. Note that                          be constrained. That is, the data is insufficiently clear on whether
this mask covers regions beyond the |𝑏| < 40◦ limit and hence in                       this dipole aligns with the CMB dipole, or has a preferred direction
principle is better in removing the over-densities concentrated in the                 somewhere away from the CMB dipole. This is likely happening
northern hemisphere along the line of 𝑙 ≈ 0◦ . Still, for Quaia low, the               because, while 𝑀4 has one less parameter than 𝑀1 and hence a more
Bayes factor for the kinematic dipole (𝑀6 ) is about equal to that of                  favourable Occam factor, it also has less explanatory power. On net,
the double dipole (𝑀2 ) where the 30∗ mask is employed, suggesting                     the models balance out in terms of support.

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                                                              The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia                     11
                                                                                       6.2 Dipole estimation from the results
              60°
                                                                                       Having interpreted our results, we present our final determination
  30°                                                                                  of the cosmic dipole in Quaia. To reiterate the foregoing, we take
                                                                                       the result from the 40◦ mask from Quaia low and withhold any
0°
         150° 120° 90°        60°   30°         0°   330° 300° 270° 240° 210°          conclusions regarding Quaia high.
                                                                                          For Quaia low, a dipole aligned both in direction and magnitude
                                                         Contamination dipole (C)
                                                                                       with the CMB dipole (𝑀6 ) best accounts for the results. This model
  -30°
                                                                                       has positive support over the next-favoured model 𝑀5 (ln 𝐵65 = 2.6),
                                                         Quaia low dipole (L)
                                                                                       which only fixes the dipole magnitude to that expected from the
             -60°                                        CMB dipole
                                                                                       CMB. Accordingly, the inferred distribution of quasars in Quaia low
                                                                                       is consistent with the kinematic interpretation of the CMB, and thus
                                                                                       is consistent with the cosmological principle.
Figure 7. Projection of the 2D posterior distribution for the Quaia low dipole
and the contaminated dipole, as defined in equations (21)–(23), using a 40◦
mask. The contours give intervals of 11.8%, 39.4% and 67.5% of posterior               6.3 Impact of priors on results
mass, equivalent to 0.5𝜎, 1𝜎 and 1.5𝜎 for a 2D Gaussian.
                                                                                       It is worth noting that because the marginal likelihood in Bayes’s the-
                                                                                       orem is an integral over all parameter space, it is generally sensitive to
   We are hesitant to draw genuine conclusions from Quaia high be-                     the choice of prior. This could have an effect on the inferences made
cause of the building evidence that the sample suffers more severely                   when evaluating competing hypotheses. Thus, we also investigated
from contamination than Quaia low. Inspection of Fig. 6 lends sup-                     whether or not our conclusions still hold with a narrower prior on
port to this, but as an additional check, we tested one final model on                 the dipole amplitude. Specifically, we sampled the dipole amplitude
both samples. Suppose that Quaia high is in fact contaminated, such                    according to 𝐷 ∼ [0, 0.1] and the quadrupole amplitude according
that the sample consists of some genuine dipole component aligned                      to 𝐷˜ ∼ [−0.1, 0]. These ranges of values are one order of magnitude
with that of Quaia low (L), as well as a contaminated component.                       smaller than our previous choices.
If so, then using our Poissonian methodology, the rate parameter                           With more restrictive priors, we find that our conclusions do not
describing Quaia high (H) for the 𝑖-th pixel would be                                  change; that is, our findings are not strongly sensitive to the choice
(𝜆𝑖 )H = (𝜆𝑖 )L + (𝜆𝑖 )H−L                                                      (21)   of prior. In general, the marginal likelihood for the dipole hypothesis
                                                                                       (𝑀1 ), quadrupole hypothesis (𝑀3 ) and kinematic direction hypoth-
       = 𝑁¯ L (1 + DL · p̂i ) + 𝑁¯ H−L (1 + DC · p̂i )                          (22)
                                                                                       esis (𝑀4 ) increased with respect to the other hypotheses. With a
where H − L refers to the ‘high minus low’ sample and C refers to                      |𝑏| < 40◦ galactic plane mask on Quaia low, the Bayes factor for
the contaminated dipole component. The ‘high minus low’ sample is                      𝑀1 moved from 2.8 → 5.2, 0.5 → 2.9 for 𝑀3 and 5.8 → 8.0 for
simply a catalogue we constructed containing the sources in Quaia                      𝑀4 . This is with respect to the point-by-point approach, but the trend
high that are not in Quaia low. In this model, we fit both catalogues                  of increasing Bayes factors was similar for the Poissonian approach.
simultaneously: we use the rate parameter (𝜆𝑖 )L to fit a dipole to                    While 𝑀4 is slightly more favoured than it was hitherto, 𝑀6 is still
Quaia low, which is our genuine component, and use the rate pa-                        the dominant hypothesis (recall it has a Bayes factor of 10, as in
rameter (𝜆𝑖 )H to fit the Quaia high sample. Accordingly, the total                    Table A1). Similar changes occur for Quaia high. 𝑀4 remains the
likelihood is the sum of the two likelihoods for both catalogues, i.e.                 favoured hypothesis, but with only marginally more support than 𝑀1 .
             ∑︁
             𝑛pix.                      ∑︁
                                        𝑛pix.                                          However, since the marginal likelihood for 𝑀4 increases while 𝑀5
ln Ltot. =           ln 𝑃(𝑁𝑖 | 𝚯L ) +           ln 𝑃(𝑁𝑖 | 𝚯H ).                 (23)   and 𝑀6 are fixed between the two prior functions, 𝑀4 prevails more
             𝑖=1                        𝑖=1                                            significantly over the other kinematic hypotheses. None the less, we
In this case, the set of parameters 𝚯L = { 𝑁¯ L , 𝐷 𝐿 , 𝑙 𝐿 , 𝑏 𝐿 } and 𝚯H =           reserve drawing further conclusions from Quaia high for the reasons
{𝚯L , 𝑁¯ H−L , 𝐷 C , 𝑙C , 𝑏 C }, since the rate parameter for Quaia high               mentioned in Section 6.1. Thus, even with more restrictive priors,
now depends on the parameters of the dipole for Quaia low and the                      the best explanation of the data is a dipole consistent with the CMB
parameters for the contaminated ‘high minus low’ component.                            dipole.
   Testing this on a 40◦ mask yielded the posterior distributions seen
in Fig 7. Evidently, the Quaia low dipole is recovered well (cf. Fig. 6),
                                                                                       6.4 Final thoughts and future outlook
and the bulk of the posterior mass coincides with the CMB dipole.
In contrast, the contamination dipole, which to reiterate has a rate                   In this work, we presented a Bayesian analysis of the distribution
parameter described by 𝑁¯ H−L (1 + DC · p̂i ), coincides with the region               of quasars in the Quaia catalogue of Storey-Fisher et al. (2023).
of over-density near the galactic centre. This is instructive insofar                  Analysing both the Quaia low and Quaia high samples, there is sub-
that it lends further evidence to their being sources near the galactic                stantial evidence that systematic effects arising from the construc-
centre which significantly contaminate Quaia high.                                     tion of the selection function introduce spurious over-densities and
   To summarise all the above, we form the view that while the over-                   under-densities into the catalogue, contaminating it. This affects the
densities are removed with the |𝑏| < 40◦ mask for Quaia low, they                      inference of the cosmic dipole for both samples. After masking the
are present beyond this limit for Quaia high. Thus, we use the 40◦                     contaminated regions, the inferred dipole is consistent with the CMB
mask to infer the cosmic dipole in Quaia low, and more broadly the                     dipole in both magnitude and direction for Quaia low, but the data
Quaia sample. This is predicated on its ability to remove most of                      affords insufficient clarity to define the parameters of the dipole for
the clustering issues arising from the selection function. For Quaia                   Quaia high. There, the dipole drifts along 𝑙 = 0◦ towards high values
high, we can at best infer that there is a dipole, but not its parameters.             of 𝑏 as more conservative galactic plane masks are applied, which
There is strong reason to believe that this is because the sample is                   we have identified as an effect of a large over-density in the northern
contaminated by sources not part of the quasar background.                             hemisphere. However, taking the results together, the inferred dipole

                                                                                                                                      MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
12      Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
in the distribution of quasars is in agreement with the CMB dipole,        REFERENCES
and hence the cosmological principle.
                                                                           Abdalla E., et al., 2022, Journal of High Energy Astrophysics, 34, 49
   There are numerous avenues that can be pursued in the future to         Alonso D., Fabbian G., Storey-Fisher K., Eilers A.-C., García-García C.,
build on this result. These include:                                            Hogg D. W., Rix H.-W., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2306.17748
                                                                           Astropy Collaboration et al., 2022, apj, 935, 167
   (i) Studying the redshift-based evolution of the dipole. In this
                                                                           Bengaly C. A., Maartens R., Santos M. G., 2018, J. Cosmology Astropart.
work, we examined the cosmic dipole of both Quaia samples without               Phys., 2018, 031
reference to the quasar redshift distribution. A redshift-binned selec-    Blake C., Wall J., 2002, Nature, 416, 150
tion function map for Quaia high has been released, in which a cut at      Cheng Y.-T., Chang T.-C., Lidz A., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2309.02490
𝑧 = 1.47 was imposed to divide sources into those at a redshift lower      Colin J., Mohayaee R., Rameez M., Sarkar S., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 1045
and greater than this threshold (Alonso et al. 2023). Future work          Conn A. R., et al., 2011, ApJ, 740, 69
might generate a number of source redshift bins, regenerating the se-      Conn A. R., et al., 2012, ApJ, 758, 11
lection map for each bin using the code released with Storey-Fisher        Dalang C., Bonvin C., 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
et al. (2023), and then study the evolution of the cosmic dipole as a           Society, 512, 3895
function of redshift. This approach has been utilised by Horstmann         Dam L., Lewis G. F., Brewer B. J., 2023, MNRAS, 525, 231
et al. (2022) in their study of the dipole evolution of Type Ia SNe.       Darling J., 2022, ApJ, 931, L14
                                                                           Ellis G. F. R., Baldwin J. E., 1984, MNRAS, 206, 377
   (ii) A joint analysis with other data-sets. A joint analysis of Quaia
                                                                           European Space Agency Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium
with other all-sky catalogues such as radio galaxies, SNe and other
                                                                                2021,      https://gea.esac.esa.int/archive/documentation/
quasar samples can give interesting insights into the overall matter            GEDR3/pdf/GaiaEDR3_documentation_1.1.pdf
dipole of the universe. It might also shed light on how systematic         Gaia Collaboration et al., 2016, A&A, 595, A1
effects are influencing the recovered dipole for different catalogues.     Gaia Collaboration et al., 2023a, A&A, 674, A1
Such cross-sample studies have been performed by many different re-        Gaia Collaboration et al., 2023b, A&A, 674, A41
search groups (see e.g. Secrest et al. 2022; Darling 2022; Wagenveld       Górski K. M., Hivon E., Banday A. J., Wandelt B. D., Hansen F. K., Reinecke
et al. 2023).                                                                   M., Bartelmann M., 2005, ApJ, 622, 759
   (iii) A revisit of the Quaia selection function. In this work, sub-     Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357
stantial masking of the galactic plane was employed to screen out          Harrison E. R., 2000, Cosmology. The science of the universe.. Cambridge
over-densities and under-densities, which are suspected to arise not            University Press
                                                                           Horstmann N., Pietschke Y., Schwarz D. J., 2022, A&A, 668, A34
because of the Earth’s peculiar motion, but because of systematic
                                                                           Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90
errors introduced by the selection function. Our primary concern is
                                                                           Kass R. E., Raftery A. E., 1995, Journal of the American Statistical Associ-
how the selection function appears to over-estimate source density              ation, 90, 773
near the galactic centre. These density fluctuations have limited our      Koposov        S.,     et   al.,    2023,    joshspeagle/dynesty:     v2.1.2,
ability to determine the cosmic dipole of Quaia, chiefly by reducing            doi:10.5281/zenodo.7995596, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
the final number of sources which are analysed after masking. Hence             7995596
a full appraisal of the selection function will be essential in deter-     Kothari R., Panwar M., Singh G., Tiwari P., Jain P., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p.
mining the robustness of the cosmic dipole within the Quaia sample              arXiv:2208.14397
and its impact on the cosmological principle.                              Kumar Aluri P., et al., 2023, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 40, 094001
                                                                           Mackay D. J. C., 2003, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algo-
                                                                                rithms. Cambridge University Press
                                                                           Marocco F., et al., 2021, ApJS, 253, 8
                                                                           Milne E. A., 1935, Relativity, Gravitation and World-structure. Oxford Uni-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                                versity Press
                                                                           Oayda O. T., Lewis G. F., 2023, MNRAS, 523, 667
We first wish to extend our sincere gratitude to the authors of Storey-
                                                                           Peebles P., 2022, Annals of Physics, 447, 169159
Fisher et al. (2023) – we thank them for making the Quaia catalogue
                                                                           Planck Collaboration et al., 2020, A&A, 641, A1
publicly available and for their positive responses to our queries.        Riello M., et al., 2021, A&A, 649, A3
We also wish to acknowledge and thank the insightful comments              Secrest N. J., von Hausegger S., Rameez M., Mohayaee R., Sarkar S., Colin
made by the anonymous referee. VM acknowledges Prof. Kulinder                   J., 2021, ApJ, 908, L51
Pal Singh, IISER Mohali for his support; DST, Government of India          Secrest N. J., von Hausegger S., Rameez M., Mohayaee R., Sarkar S., 2022,
for the INSPIRE-SHE scholarship and University of Sydney’s in-                  ApJ, 937, L31
ternship program which made this work possible. OTO is supported           Siewert T. M., Schmidt-Rubart M., Schwarz D. J., 2021, A&A, 653, A9
by the Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP)               Singal A. K., 2011, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 742, L23
Scholarship. This work made use of the Python packages dynesty             Singal A. K., 2019, Phys. Rev. D, 100, 063501
(Skilling 2004, 2006; Koposov et al. 2023), healpy (Górski et al.          Singal A. K., 2021, Universe, 7
2005; Zonca et al. 2019), numpy (Harris et al. 2020), matplotlib           Singal A. K., 2022, MNRAS, 515, 5969
                                                                           Singal A. K., 2023, MNRAS, 524, 3636
(Hunter 2007), pandas (Wes McKinney 2010; The Pandas Develop-
                                                                           Skilling J., 2004, in Fischer R., Preuss R., Toussaint U. V., eds, American
ment Team 2020), scipy (Virtanen et al. 2020) and astropy (Astropy
                                                                                Institute of Physics Conference Series Vol. 735, Bayesian Inference and
Collaboration et al. 2022).                                                     Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering: 24th Interna-
                                                                                tional Workshop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy Methods
                                                                                in Science and Engineering. pp 395–405, doi:10.1063/1.1835238
                                                                           Skilling J., 2006, Bayesian Analysis, 1, 833
DATA AVAILABILITY                                                          Sorrenti F., Durrer R., Kunz M., 2022, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2212.10328
                                                                           Speagle J. S., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3132
The data used in this study will be made available with a reasonable       Storey-Fisher K., Hogg D. W., Rix H.-W., Eilers A.-C., Fabbian G., Blanton
request to the authors.                                                         M., Alonso D., 2023, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2306.17749

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                                                              The Cosmic Dipole in Quaia       13
The Pandas Development Team 2020, pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas,
    doi:10.5281/zenodo.3509134, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
    3509134
Tiwari P., Nusser A., 2016, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics,
    2016, 062
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Wagenveld J. D., Klöckner H.-R., Schwarz D. J., 2023, A&A, 675, A72
Watkins R., et al., 2023, MNRAS, 524, 1885
Wes McKinney 2010, in Stéfan van der Walt Jarrod Millman eds, Pro-
    ceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. pp 56 – 61,
    doi:10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
Wright E. L., et al., 2010, AJ, 140, 1868
Zhou H., Li Z., 2020, ApJ, 889, 186
Zonca A., Singer L., Lenz D., Reinecke M., Rosset C., Hivon E., Gorski K.,
    2019, Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1298



APPENDIX A: BAYES FACTORS FOR TESTED
HYPOTHESES
Tables of Bayes factors for all the tested hypotheses are given on the
following page.




                                                                                             MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
14       Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                    Hypothesis
                                                           0.0            10.0            20.0           30.0              40.0            30.0*
                    𝑀0 (Null)                              0.0             0.0             0.0            0.0               0.0             0.0
                    𝑀1 (Dipole)                          130.6           109.5            49.4           14.4               2.8            11.3
                    𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                   175.0           130.6            57.7           18.9               0.2            14.5
                    𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                       44.3            21.1            10.2            6.2               0.5            12.0
                    𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              23.4            30.5            24.0           12.8               5.8            13.2
                    𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               50.4            45.7            28.7           14.0               7.4            11.8
                    𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 23.4            27.0            22.9           15.5              10.0            14.6

Table A1. Table of Bayes Factors for different hypotheses and galactic masks using the Quaia low catalogue with the point-by-point analysis. Here, 30∗ represents
the combination of a 30◦ mask and a 4 sr circular mask centered at the (𝑙 ◦ , 𝑏◦ ) = (0, 0). The highlighted cell represents the model with the highest Bayes factor,
indicating it has the strongest level of support.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                    Hypothesis
                                                           0.0            10.0            20.0           30.0              40.0            30.0*
                    𝑀0 (Null)                              0.0             0.0             0.0            0.0               0.0             0.0
                    𝑀1 (Dipole)                          131.4           109.9            49.9           14.5               3.5            11.7
                    𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                   175.6           132.0            58.9           20.0               1.4            15.2
                    𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                       45.5            22.1            11.2            7.4               1.6            13.1
                    𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              23.8            30.7            24.5           12.9               6.1            13.4
                    𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               50.9            46.4            29.5           14.1               7.9            12.1
                    𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 23.7            27.5            23.6           16.0              10.5            15.2

Table A2. As for Table A1 but with the Poisson statistics.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                    Hypothesis
                                                           0.0            10.0            20.0           30.0              40.0            30.0*
                    𝑀0 (Null)                              0.0             0.0             0.0            0.0               0.0             0.0
                    𝑀1 (Dipole)                          375.9           308.5          146.4            49.6              21.0            18.6
                    𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                   426.8           329.2          156.4            49.6              20.3            16.3
                    𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                       64.4            27.5            10.2            1.6               0.0             6.8
                    𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              32.6            43.2            43.6           29.2              21.3            16.0
                    𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               98.7            88.9            58.0           31.4              21.1            16.8
                    𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 30.3            35.7            34.9           26.1              20.4            17.4

Table A3. As for Table A1 but with Quaia high.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                    Hypothesis
                                                           0.0            10.0            20.0           30.0              40.0            30.0*
                    𝑀0 (Null)                              0.0             0.0             0.0            0.0               0.0             0.0
                    𝑀1 (Dipole)                          376.0           308.1          146.5            49.3              21.2            18.8
                    𝑀2 (Double Dipole)                   426.8           328.5          155.8            50.9              20.2            16.2
                    𝑀3 (Quadrupole)                       64.4            27.7            10.2            2.3               0.2             7.2
                    𝑀4 (Kinematic Direction)              32.5            43.2            43.6           29.2              21.4            16.3
                    𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               98.3            88.6            57.7           31.6              21.0            16.6
                    𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 30.2            35.7            34.7           26.2              20.4            17.4

Table A4. As for Table A1 but with Quaia high and the Poisson statistics.


This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.




MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2023)
                                               MNRAS 000, 1–2 (2024)                                                  Preprint 16 August 2024                           Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0




                                               Correction to: The cosmic dipole in the Quaia sample of quasars: a
                                               Bayesian analysis

                                               Vasudev Mittal,1,2∗★ Oliver T. Oayda,2∗ † and Geraint F. Lewis2
                                               ∗ Joint first author
                                               1 Department of Physical Sciences, IISER Mohali, Knowledge City, Sector 81, SAS Nagar, Manauli PO 140306, Punjab, India
                                               2 Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics A28, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia




arXiv:2311.14938v2 [astro-ph.CO] 15 Aug 2024
                                               Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ



                                               Key words: errata, addenda – quasars: general – cosmology: observations – cosmology: theory – large-scale structure of
                                               Universe



                                               In the original paper (Mittal et al. 2024), an error was made in the                                 ×104
                                               calculation of the distribution of spectral indices 𝛼, as appearing in
                                               fig. 2 of that paper. The error arises from equation (3), which in the                                      α distribution (low)

                                               original paper reads                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                           α distribution (high)
                                                                                                                                                           ᾱ = 0.48 (low)
                                               𝑚 𝜈 = −2.5 log10 𝑆 𝜈 + ZP.                                             (1)                                  ᾱ = 0.41 (high)




                                                                                                                                 Number count
                                               While this equation is mathematically correct, the issue relates to                              6
                                               the correct interpretation of the units of the passband flux density
                                               𝑆 𝜈 when using Gaia magnitudes. These magnitudes, like the G band
                                               magnitude as appearing in the phot_g_mean_mag column of the                                      4
                                               Gaia DR3 release table, are defined such that 𝑆 𝜈 in Equation (1) is
                                               in units of photoelectrons per second (𝑒 − 𝑠 −1 ; Hambly et al. 2022).
                                               We noted this in our original paper at the beginning of Section 4.2.2,                           2
                                               at which stage we mentioned that to convert from 𝑒 − 𝑠 −1 into Jy, one
                                               must first multiply the passband flux density by a correction factor
                                               𝑐 𝜈 to give units of W m −2 Hz −1 . However, since this factor was not                           0
                                               applied in equation (4) in the original work, equation (5) is incorrect                              −2           −1          0        1               2
                                               as one cannot use the relation 𝑆 𝜈 ∝ 𝜈 − 𝛼 if 𝑆 𝜈 is in units of 𝑒 − 𝑠 −1 .                                        Spectral index α (G − BP)
                                                  To correct this, let 𝑆 ′𝜈 denote the passband flux density in
                                               W m −2 Hz −1 such that 𝑆 ′𝜈 = 𝑐 𝜈 𝑆 𝜈 . Substituting this into Equation (1)
                                               yields                                                                          Figure 1. Distribution of spectral indices 𝛼 in the Quaia low and Quaia
                                                                                                                               high samples computed from 𝑚𝐺−𝐵𝑃 . Blue and orange are used to denote
                                               𝑚 𝜈 = −2.5 log10 𝑆 ′𝜈 + 2.5 log10 𝑐 𝜈 + ZP.                            (2)      Quaia low and Quaia high respectively. The mean spectral indices 𝛼¯ for each
                                               Thus, equations (4) and (5) in the original work should be replaced             catalogue are indicated by the vertical lines.
                                               with these corrected versions:
                                                                            
                                                                      ′    ′
                                               𝑚 G−BP = 2.5 log10 𝑆BP    /𝑆G   + 2.5 log10 (𝑐 G /𝑐 BP ) + 𝑘    (3)                As the Ellis & Baldwin (1984) relation is dependent on 𝛼, the cor-
                                                         𝜖 + 𝑘 − 𝑚 G−BP                                                        rection to the spectral index changes the expected dipole amplitude
                                               =⇒ 𝛼𝑖 =                                                                (4)      D. We repeated the methodology in Section 4.2.2 with the amended
                                                       2.5 log10 (𝜈BP /𝜈G )
                                                                                                                               values of 𝛼, finding a distribution of dipole amplitudes as shown in
                                               where 𝜖 is 2.5 log10 (𝑐 G /𝑐 BP ) and 𝑘 is ZPG − ZPBP as defined orig-          Fig. 2. This is to replace fig. 4 of the original work. We thus take the
                                               inally. The value of these correction factors for each passband are             mean amplitude of D̄ = 0.0048 for Quaia low and D̄ = 0.0043 for
                                               given in section 5.4.1 of the Gaia DR3 documentation (Busso et al.              Quaia high, using these as the dipole expectations.
                                               2022). With the correction applied, fig. 2 in the original work is to be           Correcting for this error in the way described above impacts the
                                               replaced with Fig. 1 as shown below. Since fig. 3 in the original work          relative Bayesian evidences of our different hypotheses. This is be-
                                               included the correction factor when converting Gaia magnitudes to               cause models which incorporate the expected dipole amplitude will
                                               flux densities, this figure does not need to be altered.                        necessarily arrive at different marginal likelihoods. These are models
                                                                                                                               𝑀5 (kinematic velocity) and 𝑀6 (kinematic dipole) in our original
                                               ★ E-mail: vasudeviiser@gmail.com                                                paper. Accordingly, the last two rows of tables A1–A4 in the original
                                               † E-mail: oliver.oayda@sydney.edu.au                                            paper are to be replaced with those given here in Tables 1–4.

                                               © 2024 The Authors
2               Mittal, Oayda & Lewis
                                                                              institutions, in particular the institutions participating in the Gaia
               600                                 Amplitude (low)            Multilateral Agreement.
                                                   Amplitude (high)
               500                                 D̄ = 0.0048 (low)
                                                   D̄ = 0.0043 (high)
                                                                              REFERENCES
               400


 Probability
                                                                              Busso G., et al., 2022, Gaia DR3 documentation Chapter 5: Photometric
               300                                                                 data, Gaia DR3 documentation, European Space Agency; Gaia Data
                                                                                   Processing and Analysis Consortium, https://gea.esac.esa.int/
                                                                                   archive/documentation/GDR3/index.html
               200
                                                                              Ellis G. F. R., Baldwin J. E., 1984, MNRAS, 206, 377
                                                                              Hambly N., et al., 2022, Gaia DR3 documentation Chapter 20: Datamodel
               100                                                                 description, Gaia DR3 documentation, European Space Agency; Gaia
                                                                                   Data Processing and Analysis Consortium, https://gea.esac.esa.
                 0                                                                 int/archive/documentation/GDR3/index.html
                     0.002   0.004      0.006         0.008           0.010   Mittal V., Oayda O. T., Lewis G. F., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 8497
                                  Amplitude D
                                                                              This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

Figure 2. Probability distribution for the dipole amplitude assuming 𝑣CMB .
This follows from the analysis in Section 4.2.2 and was performed with both
the Quaia low and Quaia high samples.



   Based on these tables, our conclusions are altered slightly. The
relative ordering of each model in terms of evidential power is not
changed. Namely, for the Quaia low sample with a 40◦ galactic plane
mask, the kinematic dipole (model 𝑀6 ) is still the prevailing model.
However, the difference in support between 𝑀6 and the next-favoured
model, 𝑀4 (the marginal likelihood of which is given in the original
work), becomes ln 𝐵64 = 1.5. This means that the kinematic dipole is
somewhat less preeminent than as in the original work (ln 𝐵65 = 2.6).
   Additionally, the conclusion in section 6.3 in the original work
needs to be replaced. We now find that our conclusions are, to a
certain extent, sensitive to the choice of prior. As mentioned there,
after adjusting the prior function for D from U [0, 1.0] to U [0, 0.1],
the marginal likelihood of model 𝑀4 increases to 8.0 (Quaia low;
𝑏 ◦ < |40| masked). Based on the corrected Bayes factors in Table 1,
this means that model 𝑀4 (kinematic direction) is the prevailing
model with ln 𝐵46 = 0.7, in which case we find D ≈ 11 −5      +5 × 10 −3 .
Although, this Bayes factor is indicative of only a slight preference
for 𝑀4 over 𝑀6 . Meanwhile, the conclusions for Quaia high using
the adjusted prior on D are unchanged.
   Though these aspects have been altered, it still remains that the
Quaia sample strongly favours a dipole aligning with the direction
of the CMB dipole. The question of its amplitude is not as decisive;
while we cannot rule out the possibility of a value larger than expected
from the CMB dipole, we have also pointed towards support for it
being equal to the CMB value. This leaves significant scope for future
inquiry to attempt to resolve this matter.



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We extend our sincere gratitude to Nathan Secrest, who pointed out
the steepness of our original spectral indices and generously shared
some of their own results. This led us to uncover the error mentioned
in this correction.
   This work has made use of data from the European Space
Agency (ESA) mission Gaia (https://www.cosmos.esa.int/
gaia), processed by the Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consor-
tium (DPAC, https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dpac/
consortium). Funding for the DPAC has been provided by national

MNRAS 000, 1–2 (2024)
                                                                                          Correction to: The cosmic dipole in Quaia                                3
                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                     Hypothesis
                                                            0.0           10.0            20.0           30.0             40.0            30.0*
                     𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               30.4           27.8            17.7            9.1              5.3             7.5
                     𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 16.2           18.4            15.7           11.0              7.3            10.1

Table 1. Table of Bayes Factors for different hypotheses and galactic masks using the Quaia low catalogue with the point-by-point analysis. Here, 30∗ represents
the combination of a 30◦ mask and a 4 sr circular mask centered at the (𝑙 ◦ , 𝑏◦ ) = (0, 0). The highlighted cell represents the model with the highest Bayes factor,
indicating it has the strongest level of support.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                     Hypothesis
                                                            0.0           10.0            20.0           30.0             40.0            30.0*
                     𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               30.4           27.9            17.7            9.0              5.1             7.4
                     𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 16.3           18.4            15.6           11.0              7.1            10.1

Table 2. As for Table 1 but with the Poisson statistics.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                     Hypothesis
                                                            0.0           10.0            20.0           30.0             40.0            30.0*
                     𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               62.9           56.6            37.3           20.9             14.6            11.5
                     𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 21.8           25.2            24.5           18.5             14.5            12.6

Table 3. As for Table 1 but with Quaia high.


                                                                                     Galactic mask angle 𝑏◦
                     Hypothesis
                                                            0.0           10.0            20.0           30.0             40.0            30.0*
                     𝑀5 (Kinematic Velocity)               63.1           56.5            37.4           20.7             14.9            11.3
                     𝑀6 (Kinematic Dipole)                 21.9           25.1            24.2           18.6             14.5            12.7

Table 4. As for Table 1 but with Quaia high and the Poisson statistics.




                                                                                                                                          MNRAS 000, 1–2 (2024)
